Adaptive and Predictive Control (APC)
Dr. Stefan Sosnowski / Denis Cehajic

Problem 1: MRAC for a PD controller using MIT Rule
In the following, adaptation for an ideal PD controller
will be discussed using the Model Reference Adaptive Control (MRAC) scheme. Therefore consider a process with transfer function and unknown parameter J. This describes e.g. a robot arm with unknown load J and current to torque constant c, where the motor current is the input and the angular velocity is the output.  

a) Determine the closed-loop transfer function G(s).
[ Replace $U(s)$ in the first equation ]

b) Choose a reference model Gm (s) with time constant T = 0.1 and stable zero.
c) Derive the update formula for Kp using the MIT rule.
d) Sketch a block diagram for the adaptation of Kp .
Problem 2: Adaptive Controller Derivation using Lyapunov Theory
Consider the given plant model
x˙ p = ap xp + bp λu
where ap , bp are known and λ = 0 is unknown except for its sign.
a) Design an adaptive controller via a Lyapunov function approach, such that the plant system behaves
like the reference model
x˙ m = am xm + bm r
where am < 0 and r is the reference input.
b) Extend the previously developed controller, such that some gains γx and γr can be used to adjust
the rate of convergence of the parameter vectors θx (t) and θr (t).
Problem 3: Lyapunov for State Space Systems
Consider the nonlinear plant model
x˙ 2 = ax21 + bx2 + u
(1)
with states x1 , x2 ∈ R, input u ∈ R, output y ∈ R, and parameters a, b ∈ R.
a) Assuming that the parameters a and b are known, design a state feedback controller u(x1 , x2 ) such
that the behavior of (1) is given by the reference model
y = Gm (s)uref
Gm (s) = 2
b) Based on the above solution, design an adaptive controller for the case when a and b are unknown
and show that the system is stable.
Problem 4: Choice of Adaptive Control Law
In the system shown in the figure, determine rules for adjusting the parameters k1 and k2 so that the
output error e1 tends to zero.
e1
a) Determine appropriate differential equations for the reference model, the plant, and the input from
the figure.
b) Transfer the differential equations in state space representation with matrices Am and Ap and vector
c) Find the elements of P , such that ATm P + P Am = −Q with Q = I in this case.
d) Determine the update rules for the parameters k1 and k2 , so that e1 approaches zero, by choosing
an appropriate Lyapunov function containing the weighting matrix P .
