Engineering Mechanics

Dynamics

Engineering Mechanics
Volume 2

Dynamics
Seventh Edition

J. L. Meriam
L. G. Kraige
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University

John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

On the Cover: NASA and the European Space Agency are collaborating on the design of
future missions which will gather samples of Martian surface material and return them
to the earth. This artist’s view shows a spacecraft carrying a sample-retrieving rover
and an ascent vehicle as it approaches Mars. The rover would collect previously gathered materials and deliver them to the ascent vehicle, which would then rendezvous
with another spacecraft already in orbit about Mars. This orbiting spacecraft would
then travel to the earth. Such missions are planned for the 2020’s.
Vice President & Executive Publisher
Associate Publisher
Executive Editor
Editorial Assistant
Content Manager
Production Editor
Marketing Manager
Senior Designer
Cover Design
Cover Photo
Electronic Illustrations
Senior Photo Editor
Product Designer
Content Editor
Media Editor

Don Fowley
Dan Sayre
Linda Ratts
Christopher Teja
Kevin Holm
Jill Spikereit, Production Management Services provided by
Camelot Editorial Services, LLC
Christopher Ruel
Maureen Eide
Kristine Carney
Courtesy of NASA/JPL-Caltech
Precision Graphics
Lisa Gee
Jennifer Welter
Wendy Ashenberg
Jennifer Mullin

This book was set in 10.5/12 ITC Century Schoolbook by PreMediaGlobal, and printed and bound
by RR Donnelley. The cover was printed by RR Donnelley.
This book is printed on acid-free paper. ȍ
Founded in 1807, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. has been a valued source of knowledge and understanding
for more than 200 years, helping people around the world meet their needs and fulﬁll their
aspirations. Our company is built on a foundation of principles that include responsibility to the
communities we serve and where we live and work. In 2008, we launched a Corporate Citizenship
Initiative, a global effort to address the environmental, social, economic, and ethical challenges we
face in our business. Among the issues we are addressing are carbon impact, paper speciﬁcations
and procurement, ethical conduct within our business and among our vendors, and community and
charitable support. For more information, please visit our website: www.wiley.com/go/citizenship.
Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning or otherwise, except as permitted under Sections 107
or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission of the
Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright
Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, website www.copyright.com.
Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John
Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030-5774, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008,
website http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Evaluation copies are provided to qualiﬁed academics and professionals for review purposes only, for
use in their courses during the next academic year.These copies are licensed and may not be sold or
transferred to a third party. Upon completion of the review period, please return the evaluation
copy to Wiley. Return instructions and a free of charge return mailing label are available at
www.wiley.com/go/returnlabel. If you have chosen to adopt this textbook for use in your course,
please accept this book as your complimentary desk copy. Outside of the United States, please
contact your local sales representative.
9780470614815

Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

Foreword

This series of textbooks was begun in 1951 by the late Dr. James L. Meriam. At that time,
the books represented a revolutionary transformation in undergraduate mechanics education.
They became the deﬁnitive textbooks for the decades that followed as well as models for other
engineering mechanics texts that have subsequently appeared. Published under slightly different titles prior to the 1978 First Editions, this textbook series has always been characterized by
logical organization, clear and rigorous presentation of the theory, instructive sample problems, and a rich collection of real-life problems, all with a high standard of illustration. In addition to the U.S. versions, the books have appeared in SI versions and have been translated into
many foreign languages. These texts collectively represent an international standard for undergraduate texts in mechanics.
The innovations and contributions of Dr. Meriam (1917–2000) to the ﬁeld of engineering mechanics cannot be overstated. He was one of the premier engineering educators of
the second half of the twentieth century. Dr. Meriam earned his B.E., M. Eng., and Ph.D.
degrees from Yale University. He had early industrial experience with Pratt and Whitney
Aircraft and the General Electric Company. During the Second World War he served in the
U.S. Coast Guard. He was a member of the faculty of the University of California–Berkeley,
Dean of Engineering at Duke University, a faculty member at the California Polytechnic
State University–San Luis Obispo, and visiting professor at the University of California–
Santa Barbara, ﬁnally retiring in 1990. Professor Meriam always placed great emphasis on
teaching, and this trait was recognized by his students wherever he taught. At Berkeley in
1963, he was the ﬁrst recipient of the Outstanding Faculty Award of Tau Beta Pi, given primarily for excellence in teaching. In 1978, he received the Distinguished Educator Award
for Outstanding Service to Engineering Mechanics Education from the American Society
for Engineering Education, and in 1992 was the Society’s recipient of the Benjamin Garver
Lamme Award, which is ASEE’s highest annual national award.
Dr. L. Glenn Kraige, coauthor of the Engineering Mechanics series since the early
1980s, has also made signiﬁcant contributions to mechanics education. Dr. Kraige earned
his B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees at the University of Virginia, principally in aerospace
v

vi

Foreword

engineering, and he currently serves as Professor of Engineering Science and Mechanics at
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University. During the mid 1970s, I had the singular
pleasure of chairing Professor Kraige’s graduate committee and take particular pride in the
fact that he was the ﬁrst of my forty-ﬁve Ph.D. graduates. Professor Kraige was invited by
Professor Meriam to team with him and thereby ensure that the Meriam legacy of textbook
authorship excellence was carried forward to future generations. For the past three decades,
this highly successful team of authors has made an enormous and global impact on the education of several generations of engineers.
In addition to his widely recognized research and publications in the ﬁeld of spacecraft
dynamics, Professor Kraige has devoted his attention to the teaching of mechanics at both
introductory and advanced levels. His outstanding teaching has been widely recognized and
has earned him teaching awards at the departmental, college, university, state, regional, and
national levels. These include the Francis J. Maher Award for excellence in education in the
Department of Engineering Science and Mechanics, the Wine Award for excellence in university teaching, and the Outstanding Educator Award from the State Council of Higher Education for the Commonwealth of Virginia. In 1996, the Mechanics Division of ASEE
bestowed upon him the Archie Higdon Distinguished Educator Award. The Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching and the Council for Advancement and Support of
Education awarded him the distinction of Virginia Professor of the Year for 1997. During
2004–2006, he held the W. S. “Pete” White Chair for Innovation in Engineering Education,
and in 2006 he teamed with Professors Scott L. Hendricks and Don H. Morris as recipients
of the XCaliber Award for Teaching with Technology. In his teaching, Professor Kraige
stresses the development of analytical capabilities along with the strengthening of physical
insight and engineering judgment. Since the early 1980s, he has worked on personal-computer
software designed to enhance the teaching/learning process in statics, dynamics, strength of
materials, and higher-level areas of dynamics and vibrations.
The Seventh Edition of Engineering Mechanics continues the same high standards set
by previous editions and adds new features of help and interest to students. It contains a
vast collection of interesting and instructive problems. The faculty and students privileged
to teach or study from Professors Meriam and Kraige’s Engineering Mechanics will beneﬁt
from the several decades of investment by two highly accomplished educators. Following
the pattern of the previous editions, this textbook stresses the application of theory to actual engineering situations, and at this important task it remains the best.

John L. Junkins
Distinguished Professor of Aerospace Engineering
Holder of the George J. Eppright Chair Professorship in Engineering
Texas A&M University
College Station, Texas

Preface

Engineering mechanics is both a foundation and a framework for most of the branches
of engineering. Many of the topics in such areas as civil, mechanical, aerospace, and agricultural engineering, and of course engineering mechanics itself, are based upon the subjects
of statics and dynamics. Even in a discipline such as electrical engineering, practitioners, in
the course of considering the electrical components of a robotic device or a manufacturing
process, may ﬁnd themselves ﬁrst having to deal with the mechanics involved.
Thus, the engineering mechanics sequence is critical to the engineering curriculum.
Not only is this sequence needed in itself, but courses in engineering mechanics also serve
to solidify the student’s understanding of other important subjects, including applied mathematics, physics, and graphics. In addition, these courses serve as excellent settings in
which to strengthen problem-solving abilities.

Philosophy
The primary purpose of the study of engineering mechanics is to develop the capacity
to predict the effects of force and motion while carrying out the creative design functions
of engineering. This capacity requires more than a mere knowledge of the physical and
mathematical principles of mechanics; also required is the ability to visualize physical conﬁgurations in terms of real materials, actual constraints, and the practical limitations which
govern the behavior of machines and structures. One of the primary objectives in a mechanics course is to help the student develop this ability to visualize, which is so vital to problem
formulation. Indeed, the construction of a meaningful mathematical model is often a more
important experience than its solution. Maximum progress is made when the principles and
their limitations are learned together within the context of engineering application.
There is a frequent tendency in the presentation of mechanics to use problems mainly as
a vehicle to illustrate theory rather than to develop theory for the purpose of solving problems. When the ﬁrst view is allowed to predominate, problems tend to become overly idealized
vii

viii

Preface

and unrelated to engineering with the result that the exercise becomes dull, academic, and
uninteresting. This approach deprives the student of valuable experience in formulating
problems and thus of discovering the need for and meaning of theory. The second view provides by far the stronger motive for learning theory and leads to a better balance between
theory and application. The crucial role played by interest and purpose in providing the
strongest possible motive for learning cannot be overemphasized.
Furthermore, as mechanics educators, we should stress the understanding that, at best,
theory can only approximate the real world of mechanics rather than the view that the real
world approximates the theory. This difference in philosophy is indeed basic and distinguishes
the engineering of mechanics from the science of mechanics.
Over the past several decades, several unfortunate tendencies have occurred in engineering education. First, emphasis on the geometric and physical meanings of prerequisite mathematics appears to have diminished. Second, there has been a signiﬁcant reduction and even
elimination of instruction in graphics, which in the past enhanced the visualization and representation of mechanics problems. Third, in advancing the mathematical level of our treatment of mechanics, there has been a tendency to allow the notational manipulation of vector
operations to mask or replace geometric visualization. Mechanics is inherently a subject
which depends on geometric and physical perception, and we should increase our efforts to
develop this ability.
A special note on the use of computers is in order. The experience of formulating problems,
where reason and judgment are developed, is vastly more important for the student than is the
manipulative exercise in carrying out the solution. For this reason, computer usage must be
carefully controlled. At present, constructing free-body diagrams and formulating governing
equations are best done with pencil and paper. On the other hand, there are instances in which
the solution to the governing equations can best be carried out and displayed using the computer. Computer-oriented problems should be genuine in the sense that there is a condition of
design or criticality to be found, rather than “makework” problems in which some parameter is
varied for no apparent reason other than to force artiﬁcial use of the computer. These thoughts
have been kept in mind during the design of the computer-oriented problems in the Seventh
Edition. To conserve adequate time for problem formulation, it is suggested that the student be
assigned only a limited number of the computer-oriented problems.
As with previous editions, this Seventh Edition of Engineering Mechanics is written with
the foregoing philosophy in mind. It is intended primarily for the ﬁrst engineering course in
mechanics, generally taught in the second year of study. Engineering Mechanics is written in
a style which is both concise and friendly. The major emphasis is on basic principles and
methods rather than on a multitude of special cases. Strong effort has been made to show
both the cohesiveness of the relatively few fundamental ideas and the great variety of problems which these few ideas will solve.

Pedagogical Features
The basic structure of this textbook consists of an article which rigorously treats the particular subject matter at hand, followed by one or more Sample Problems, followed by a group
of Problems. There is a Chapter Review at the end of each chapter which summarizes the main
points in that chapter, followed by a Review Problem set.

Problems
The 124 sample problems appear on specially colored pages by themselves. The solutions to typical dynamics problems are presented in detail. In addition, explanatory and
cautionary notes (Helpful Hints) in blue type are number-keyed to the main presentation.

Preface

There are 1541 homework exercises, of which approximately 45 percent are new to the
Seventh Edition. The problem sets are divided into Introductory Problems and Representative Problems. The ﬁrst section consists of simple, uncomplicated problems designed to help
students gain conﬁdence with the new topic, while most of the problems in the second section are of average difﬁculty and length. The problems are generally arranged in order of
increasing difﬁculty. More difﬁcult exercises appear near the end of the Representative
Problems and are marked with the symbol ᭤. Computer-Oriented Problems, marked with an
asterisk, appear in a special section at the conclusion of the Review Problems at the end of
each chapter. The answers to all problems have been provided in a special section at the end
of the textbook.
In recognition of the need for emphasis on SI units, there are approximately two problems in SI units for every one in U.S. customary units. This apportionment between the two
sets of units permits anywhere from a 50–50 emphasis to a 100-percent SI treatment.
A notable feature of the Seventh Edition, as with all previous editions, is the wealth of
interesting and important problems which apply to engineering design. Whether directly
identiﬁed as such or not, virtually all of the problems deal with principles and procedures
inherent in the design and analysis of engineering structures and mechanical systems.

Illustrations
In order to bring the greatest possible degree of realism and clarity to the illustrations,
this textbook series continues to be produced in full color. It is important to note that color
is used consistently for the identiﬁcation of certain quantities:

• red for forces and moments
• green for velocity and acceleration arrows
• orange dashes for selected trajectories of moving points
Subdued colors are used for those parts of an illustration which are not central to the
problem at hand. Whenever possible, mechanisms or objects which commonly have a certain color will be portrayed in that color. All of the fundamental elements of technical illustration which have been an essential part of this Engineering Mechanics series of textbooks
have been retained. The author wishes to restate the conviction that a high standard of illustration is critical to any written work in the ﬁeld of mechanics.

Special Features
While retaining the hallmark features of all previous editions, we have incorporated
these improvements:

• The main emphasis on the work-energy and impulse-momentum equations is now on
the time-order form, both for particles in Chapter 3 and rigid bodies in Chapter 6.

• New emphasis has been placed on three-part impulse-momentum diagrams, both for
particles and rigid bodies. These diagrams are well integrated with the time-order form
of the impulse-momentum equations.

• Within-the-chapter photographs have been added in order to provide additional
connection to actual situations in which dynamics has played a major role.

• Approximately 45 percent of the homework problems are new to this Seventh Edition.
All new problems have been independently solved in order to ensure a high degree of
accuracy.

ix

x

Preface

• New Sample Problems have been added, including ones with computer-oriented
solutions.

• All Sample Problems are printed on specially colored pages for quick identiﬁcation.
• All theory portions have been reexamined in order to maximize rigor, clarity,
readability, and level of friendliness.

• Key Concepts areas within the theory presentation have been specially marked and
highlighted.

• The Chapter Reviews are highlighted and feature itemized summaries.

Organization
The logical division between particle dynamics (Part I) and rigid-body dynamics (Part II)
has been preserved, with each part treating the kinematics prior to the kinetics. This
arrangement promotes thorough and rapid progress in rigid-body dynamics with the prior
beneﬁt of a comprehensive introduction to particle dynamics.
In Chapter 1, the fundamental concepts necessary for the study of dynamics are
established.
Chapter 2 treats the kinematics of particle motion in various coordinate systems, as
well as the subjects of relative and constrained motion.
Chapter 3 on particle kinetics focuses on the three basic methods: force-mass-acceleration
(Section A), work-energy (Section B), and impulse-momentum (Section C). The special
topics of impact, central-force motion, and relative motion are grouped together in a special
applications section (Section D) and serve as optional material to be assigned according to
instructor preference and available time. With this arrangement, the attention of the student is focused more strongly on the three basic approaches to kinetics.
Chapter 4 on systems of particles is an extension of the principles of motion for a single
particle and develops the general relationships which are so basic to the modern comprehension of dynamics. This chapter also includes the topics of steady mass ﬂow and variable
mass, which may be considered as optional material.
In Chapter 5 on the kinematics of rigid bodies in plane motion, where the equations of
relative velocity and relative acceleration are encountered, emphasis is placed jointly on
solution by vector geometry and solution by vector algebra. This dual approach serves to
reinforce the meaning of vector mathematics.
In Chapter 6 on the kinetics of rigid bodies, we place great emphasis on the basic
equations which govern all categories of plane motion. Special emphasis is also placed
on forming the direct equivalence between the actual applied forces and couples and
their ma and I␣ resultants. In this way the versatility of the moment principle is emphasized, and the student is encouraged to think directly in terms of resultant dynamics
effects.
Chapter 7, which may be treated as optional, provides a basic introduction to threedimensional dynamics which is sufﬁcient to solve many of the more common space-motion
problems. For students who later pursue more advanced work in dynamics, Chapter 7 will
provide a solid foundation. Gyroscopic motion with steady precession is treated in two ways.
The ﬁrst approach makes use of the analogy between the relation of force and linearmomentum vectors and the relation of moment and angular-momentum vectors. With this
treatment, the student can understand the gyroscopic phenomenon of steady precession
and can handle most of the engineering problems on gyroscopes without a detailed study of
three-dimensional dynamics. The second approach employs the more general momentum
equations for three-dimensional rotation where all components of momentum are accounted for.

Preface

Chapter 8 is devoted to the topic of vibrations. This full-chapter coverage will be especially useful for engineering students whose only exposure to vibrations is acquired in the
basic dynamics course.
Moments and products of inertia of mass are presented in Appendix B. Appendix C contains a summary review of selected topics of elementary mathematics as well as several numerical techniques which the student should be prepared to use in computer-solved
problems. Useful tables of physical constants, centroids, and moments of inertia are contained in Appendix D.

Supplements
The following items have been prepared to complement this textbook:

Instructor’s Manual
Prepared by the authors and independently checked, fully worked solutions to all
odd-numbered problems in the text are available to faculty by contacting their local Wiley
representative.

Instructor Lecture Resources
The following resources are available online at www.wiley.com/college/meriam. There
may be additional resources not listed.
WileyPlus: A complete online learning system to help prepare and present lectures, assign
and manage homework, keep track of student progress, and customize your course content
and delivery. See the description in front of the book for more information, and the website
for a demonstration. Talk to your Wiley representative for details on setting up your WileyPlus course.
Lecture software speciﬁcally designed to aid the lecturer, especially in larger classrooms.
Written by the author and incorporating ﬁgures from the textbooks, this software is based
on the Macromedia Flash® platform. Major use of animation, concise review of the theory,
and numerous sample problems make this tool extremely useful for student self-review of
the material.
All ﬁgures in the text are available in electronic format for use in creating lecture presentations.
All Sample Problems are available as electronic ﬁles for display and discussion in the
classroom.

Acknowledgments
Special recognition is due Dr. A. L. Hale, formerly of Bell Telephone Laboratories, for
his continuing contribution in the form of invaluable suggestions and accurate checking of
the manuscript. Dr. Hale has rendered similar service for all previous versions of this entire
series of mechanics books, dating back to the 1950s. He reviews all aspects of the books, including all old and new text and ﬁgures. Dr. Hale carries out an independent solution to
each new homework exercise and provides the author with suggestions and needed corrections to the solutions which appear in the Instructor’s Manual. Dr. Hale is well known for
being extremely accurate in his work, and his ﬁne knowledge of the English language is a
great asset which aids every user of this textbook.

xi

xii

Preface

I would like to thank the faculty members of the Department of Engineering Science
and Mechanics at VPI&SU who regularly offer constructive suggestions. These include
Scott L. Hendricks, Saad A. Ragab, Norman E. Dowling, Michael W. Hyer, Michael L. Madigan, and J. Wallace Grant. Jeffrey N. Bolton of Blueﬁeld State College is recognized for his
signiﬁcant contributions to this textbook series.
The following individuals (listed in alphabetical order) provided feedback on recent
editions, reviewed samples of the Seventh Edition, or otherwise contributed to the Seventh
Edition:
Michael Ales, U.S. Merchant Marine Academy
Joseph Arumala, University of Maryland Eastern Shore
Eric Austin, Clemson University
Stephen Bechtel, Ohio State University
Peter Birkemoe, University of Toronto
Achala Chatterjee, San Bernardino Valley College
Jim Shih-Jiun Chen, Temple University
Yi-chao Chen, University of Houston
Mary Cooper, Cal Poly San Luis Obispo
Mukaddes Darwish, Texas Tech University
Kurt DeGoede, Elizabethtown College
John DesJardins, Clemson University
Larry DeVries, University of Utah
Craig Downing, Southeast Missouri State University
William Drake, Missouri State University
Raghu Echempati, Kettering University
Amelito Enriquez, Canada College
Sven Esche, Stevens Institute of Technology
Wallace Franklin, U.S. Merchant Marine Academy
Christine Goble, University of Kentucky
Barry Goodno, Georgia Institute of Technology
Robert Harder, George Fox University
Javier Hasbun, University of West Georgia
Javad Hashemi, Texas Tech University
Robert Hyers, University of Massachusetts, Amherst
Matthew Ikle, Adams State College
Duane Jardine, University of New Orleans
Mariappan Jawaharlal, California Polytechnic State University, Pomona
Qing Jiang, University of California, Riverside
Jennifer Kadlowec, Rowan University
Robert Kern, Milwaukee School of Engineering
John Krohn, Arkansas Tech University
Keith Lindler, United States Naval Academy
Francisco Manzo-Robledo, Washington State University
Geraldine Milano, New Jersey Institute of Technology
Saeed Niku, Cal Poly San Luis Obispo
Wilfrid Nixon, University of Iowa
Karim Nohra, University of South Florida
Vassilis Panoskaltsis, Case Western Reserve University
Chandra Putcha, California State University, Fullerton
Blayne Roeder, Purdue University
Eileen Rossman, Cal Poly San Luis Obispo

Preface

Nestor Sanchez, University of Texas, San Antonio
Joseph Schaefer, Iowa State University
Scott Schiff, Clemson University
Sergey Smirnov, Texas Tech University
Ertugrul Taciroglu, UCLA
Constantine Tarawneh, University of Texas
John Turner, University of Wyoming
Chris Venters, Virginia Tech
Sarah Vigmostad, University of Iowa
T. W. Wu, University of Kentucky
Mohammed Zikry, North Carolina State University
The contributions by the staff of John Wiley & Sons, Inc., including Executive Editor
Linda Ratts, Production Editor Jill Spikereit, Senior Designer Maureen Eide, and Photograph Editor Lisa Gee, reﬂect a high degree of professional competence and are duly recognized. I wish to especially acknowledge the critical production efforts of Christine Cervoni
of Camelot Editorial Services, LLC. The talented illustrators of Precision Graphics continue
to maintain a high standard of illustration excellence.
Finally, I wish to state the extremely signiﬁcant contribution of my family. In addition
to providing patience and support for this project, my wife Dale has managed the preparation of the manuscript for the Seventh Edition and has been a key individual in checking all
stages of the proof. In addition, both my daughter Stephanie Kokan and my son David
Kraige have contributed problem ideas, illustrations, and solutions to a number of the problems over the past several editions.
I am extremely pleased to participate in extending the time duration of this textbook
series well past the sixty-year mark. In the interest of providing you with the best possible
educational materials over future years, I encourage and welcome all comments and suggestions. Please address your comments to kraige@vt.edu.

Blacksburg, Virginia

xiii

Contents

PART I
DYNAMICS OF PARTICLES

1

CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION TO DYNAMICS

3

1/1

History and Modern Applications

3

1/2

Basic Concepts

4

1/3

Newton’s Laws

6

1/4

Units

6

1/5

Gravitation

8

1/6

Dimensions

11

1/7

Solving Problems in Dynamics

12

1/8

Chapter Review

15

CHAPTER 2
KINEMATICS OF PARTICLES
2/1

Introduction

21

2/2
xiv

21

Rectilinear Motion

22

Contents

2/3

Plane Curvilinear Motion

40

2/4

Rectangular Coordinates (x-y)

43

2/5

Normal and Tangential Coordinates (n-t )

54

2/6

Polar Coordinates (r-u)

66

2/7

Space Curvilinear Motion

79

2/8

Relative Motion (Translating Axes)

88

2/9

Constrained Motion of Connected Particles

98

2/10

Chapter Review

106

CHAPTER 3
KINETICS OF PARTICLES

117

3/1

117

Introduction

SECTION A

FORCE, MASS, AND ACCELERATION

118

3/2

Newton’s Second Law

118

3/3

Equation of Motion and Solution of Problems

122

3/4

Rectilinear Motion

124

3/5

Curvilinear Motion

138

SECTION B

WORK AND ENERGY

154

3/6

Work and Kinetic Energy

154

3/7

Potential Energy

175

SECTION C

IMPULSE AND MOMENTUM

191

3/8

Introduction

191

3/9

Linear Impulse and Linear Momentum

191

3/10

Angular Impulse and Angular Momentum

205

SECTION D

SPECIAL APPLICATIONS

217

3/11

Introduction

217

3/12

Impact

217

3/13

Central-Force Motion

230

3/14

Relative Motion

244

3/15

Chapter Review

255

CHAPTER 4
KINETICS OF SYSTEMS OF PARTICLES

267

4/1

Introduction

267

4/2

Generalized Newton’s Second Law

268

xv

xvi

Contents

4/3

Work-Energy

269

4/4

Impulse-Momentum

271

4/5

Conservation of Energy and Momentum

275

4/6

Steady Mass Flow

288

4/7

Variable Mass

303

4/8

Chapter Review

315

PART II
DYNAMICS OF RIGID BODIES

323

CHAPTER 5
PLANE KINEMATICS OF RIGID BODIES

325

5/1

Introduction

325

5/2

Rotation

327

5/3

Absolute Motion

338

5/4

Relative Velocity

348

5/5

Instantaneous Center of Zero Velocity

362

5/6

Relative Acceleration

372

5/7

Motion Relative to Rotating Axes

385

5/8

Chapter Review

402

CHAPTER 6
PLANE KINETICS OF RIGID BODIES

411

6/1

411

Introduction

SECTION A

FORCE, MASS, AND ACCELERATION

413

6/2

General Equations of Motion

413

6/3

Translation

420

6/4

Fixed-Axis Rotation

431

6/5

General Plane Motion

443

SECTION B

WORK AND ENERGY

459

6/6

Work-Energy Relations

459

6/7

Acceleration from Work-Energy; Virtual Work

477

SECTION C

IMPULSE AND MOMENTUM

486

6/8

Impulse-Momentum Equations

486

6/9

Chapter Review

503

Contents

CHAPTER 7
INTRODUCTION TO THREE-DIMENSIONAL DYNAMICS OF RIGID BODIES

513

7/1

513

Introduction

SECTION A

KINEMATICS

514

7/2

Translation

514

7/3

Fixed-Axis Rotation

514

7/4

Parallel-Plane Motion

515

7/5

Rotation about a Fixed Point

515

7/6

General Motion

527

SECTION B

KINETICS

539

7/7

Angular Momentum

539

7/8

Kinetic Energy

542

7/9

Momentum and Energy Equations of Motion

550

7/10

Parallel-Plane Motion

552

7/11

Gyroscopic Motion: Steady Precession

558

7/12

Chapter Review

576

CHAPTER 8
VIBRATION AND TIME RESPONSE

583

8/1

Introduction

583

8/2

Free Vibration of Particles

584

8/3

Forced Vibration of Particles

600

8/4

Vibration of Rigid Bodies

614

8/5

Energy Methods

624

8/6

Chapter Review

632

APPENDICES
APPENDIX A

AREA MOMENTS OF INERTIA

639

APPENDIX B

MASS MOMENTS OF INERTIA

641

B/1

Mass Moments of Inertia about an Axis

641

B/2

Products of Inertia

660

APPENDIX C

SELECTED TOPICS OF MATHEMATICS

671

C/1

Introduction

671

C/2

Plane Geometry

671

xvii

xviii

Contents

C/3

Solid Geometry

672

C/4

Algebra

672

C/5

Analytic Geometry

673

C/6

Trigonometry

673

C/7

Vector Operations

674

C/8

Series

677

C/9

Derivatives

677

C/10

Integrals

678

C/11

Newton’s Method for Solving Intractable Equations

681

C/12

Selected Techniques for Numerical Integration

683

APPENDIX D

USEFUL TABLES

687

Table D/1

Physical Properties

687

Table D/2

Solar System Constants

688

Table D/3

Properties of Plane Figures

689

Table D/4

Properties of Homogeneous Solids

691

INDEX

695

PROBLEM ANSWERS

701

PART I

Dynamics of
Particles

This astronaut is anchored to a foot restraint on the International Space Station’s Canadarm2.
Stocktrek Images, Inc.

1

Introduction
to Dynamics
CHAPTER OUTLINE
1/1 History and Modern Applications
1/2 Basic Concepts
1/3 Newton’s Laws
1/4 Units
1/5 Gravitation
1/6 Dimensions
1/7 Solving Problems in Dynamics
1/8 Chapter Review

1/1

History and Modern Applications

History of Dynamics
Dynamics is a relatively recent subject compared with statics. The
beginning of a rational understanding of dynamics is credited to Galileo
(1564–1642), who made careful observations concerning bodies in free
fall, motion on an inclined plane, and motion of the pendulum. He was
largely responsible for bringing a scientiﬁc approach to the investigation
of physical problems. Galileo was continually under severe criticism for
refusing to accept the established beliefs of his day, such as the philosophies of Aristotle which held, for example, that heavy bodies fall more
rapidly than light bodies. The lack of accurate means for the measurement of time was a severe handicap to Galileo, and further signiﬁcant
development in dynamics awaited the invention of the pendulum clock
by Huygens in 1657.
Newton (1642–1727), guided by Galileo’s work, was able to make an
accurate formulation of the laws of motion and, thus, to place dynamics

© Fine Art Images/SuperStock

Dynamics is that branch of mechanics which deals with the motion
of bodies under the action of forces. The study of dynamics in engineering usually follows the study of statics, which deals with the effects of
forces on bodies at rest. Dynamics has two distinct parts: kinematics,
which is the study of motion without reference to the forces which cause
motion, and kinetics, which relates the action of forces on bodies to their
resulting motions. A thorough comprehension of dynamics will provide
one of the most useful and powerful tools for analysis in engineering.

Galileo Galilei
Portrait of Galileo Galilei (1564–1642) (oil on
canvas), Sustermans, Justus (1597–1681)
(school of)/Galleria Palatina, Florence,
Italy/Bridgeman Art Library

3

4

Chapter 1

Introduction to Dynamics

James King-Holmes/PhotoResearchers, Inc.

on a sound basis. Newton’s famous work was published in the ﬁrst edition of his Principia,* which is generally recognized as one of the greatest of all recorded contributions to knowledge. In addition to stating the
laws governing the motion of a particle, Newton was the ﬁrst to correctly formulate the law of universal gravitation. Although his mathematical description was accurate, he felt that the concept of remote
transmission of gravitational force without a supporting medium was an
absurd notion. Following Newton’s time, important contributions to
mechanics were made by Euler, D’Alembert, Lagrange, Laplace, Poinsot,
Coriolis, Einstein, and others.

Artificial hand

Applications of Dynamics
Only since machines and structures have operated with high speeds
and appreciable accelerations has it been necessary to make calculations
based on the principles of dynamics rather than on the principles of
statics. The rapid technological developments of the present day require
increasing application of the principles of mechanics, particularly dynamics. These principles are basic to the analysis and design of moving
structures, to ﬁxed structures subject to shock loads, to robotic devices,
to automatic control systems, to rockets, missiles, and spacecraft, to
ground and air transportation vehicles, to electron ballistics of electrical
devices, and to machinery of all types such as turbines, pumps, reciprocating engines, hoists, machine tools, etc.
Students with interests in one or more of these and many other
activities will constantly need to apply the fundamental principles of
dynamics.

1/2

Basic Concepts

The concepts basic to mechanics were set forth in Art. 1/2 of Vol. 1
Statics. They are summarized here along with additional comments of
special relevance to the study of dynamics.
Space is the geometric region occupied by bodies. Position in space
is determined relative to some geometric reference system by means of
linear and angular measurements. The basic frame of reference for the
laws of Newtonian mechanics is the primary inertial system or astronomical frame of reference, which is an imaginary set of rectangular
axes assumed to have no translation or rotation in space. Measurements
show that the laws of Newtonian mechanics are valid for this reference
system as long as any velocities involved are negligible compared with
the speed of light, which is 300 000 km/s or 186,000 mi/sec. Measurements made with respect to this reference are said to be absolute, and
this reference system may be considered “ﬁxed” in space.
A reference frame attached to the surface of the earth has a somewhat complicated motion in the primary system, and a correction to the
basic equations of mechanics must be applied for measurements made

*The original formulations of Sir Isaac Newton may be found in the translation of his
Principia (1687), revised by F. Cajori, University of California Press, 1934.

Article 1/2

relative to the reference frame of the earth. In the calculation of rocket
and space-ﬂight trajectories, for example, the absolute motion of the
earth becomes an important parameter. For most engineering problems
involving machines and structures which remain on the surface of the
earth, the corrections are extremely small and may be neglected. For
these problems the laws of mechanics may be applied directly with measurements made relative to the earth, and in a practical sense such measurements will be considered absolute.
Time is a measure of the succession of events and is considered an
absolute quantity in Newtonian mechanics.
Mass is the quantitative measure of the inertia or resistance to
change in motion of a body. Mass may also be considered as the quantity
of matter in a body as well as the property which gives rise to gravitational attraction.
Force is the vector action of one body on another. The properties of
forces have been thoroughly treated in Vol. 1 Statics.
A particle is a body of negligible dimensions. When the dimensions
of a body are irrelevant to the description of its motion or the action of
forces on it, the body may be treated as a particle. An airplane, for example, may be treated as a particle for the description of its ﬂight path.
A rigid body is a body whose changes in shape are negligible compared with the overall dimensions of the body or with the changes in position of the body as a whole. As an example of the assumption of
rigidity, the small ﬂexural movement of the wing tip of an airplane ﬂying through turbulent air is clearly of no consequence to the description
of the motion of the airplane as a whole along its ﬂight path. For this
purpose, then, the treatment of the airplane as a rigid body is an acceptable approximation. On the other hand, if we need to examine the internal stresses in the wing structure due to changing dynamic loads, then
the deformation characteristics of the structure would have to be examined, and for this purpose the airplane could no longer be considered a
rigid body.
Vector and scalar quantities have been treated extensively in Vol.
1 Statics, and their distinction should be perfectly clear by now. Scalar
quantities are printed in lightface italic type, and vectors are shown in
boldface type. Thus, V denotes the scalar magnitude of the vector V. It
is important that we use an identifying mark, such as an underline V,
for all handwritten vectors to take the place of the boldface designation
in print. For two nonparallel vectors recall, for example, that V1 ϩ V2
and V1 ϩ V2 have two entirely different meanings.
We assume that you are familiar with the geometry and algebra of
vectors through previous study of statics and mathematics. Students
who need to review these topics will ﬁnd a brief summary of them in Appendix C along with other mathematical relations which ﬁnd frequent
use in mechanics. Experience has shown that the geometry of mechanics is often a source of difﬁculty for students. Mechanics by its very nature is geometrical, and students should bear this in mind as they
review their mathematics. In addition to vector algebra, dynamics requires the use of vector calculus, and the essentials of this topic will be
developed in the text as they are needed.

Basic Concepts

5

6

Chapter 1

Introduction to Dynamics

Dynamics involves the frequent use of time derivatives of both vectors and scalars. As a notational shorthand, a dot over a symbol will frex
quently be used to indicate a derivative with respect to time. Thus, ˙
x
means dx/dt and ¨ stands for d2x/dt2.

1/3

Newton’s Laws

Newton’s three laws of motion, stated in Art. 1/4 of Vol. 1 Statics,
are restated here because of their special signiﬁcance to dynamics. In
modern terminology they are:
Law I. A particle remains at rest or continues to move with uniform
velocity (in a straight line with a constant speed) if there is no unbalanced force acting on it.
Law II. The acceleration of a particle is proportional to the resultant force acting on it and is in the direction of this force.*
Law III. The forces of action and reaction between interacting bodies are equal in magnitude, opposite in direction, and collinear.
These laws have been veriﬁed by countless physical measurements.
The ﬁrst two laws hold for measurements made in an absolute frame of
reference, but are subject to some correction when the motion is measured relative to a reference system having acceleration, such as one attached to the surface of the earth.
Newton’s second law forms the basis for most of the analysis in dynamics. For a particle of mass m subjected to a resultant force F, the
law may be stated as
F ‫ ؍‬ma

(1/1)

where a is the resulting acceleration measured in a nonaccelerating
frame of reference. Newton’s ﬁrst law is a consequence of the second
law since there is no acceleration when the force is zero, and so the particle is either at rest or is moving with constant velocity. The third law
constitutes the principle of action and reaction with which you should
be thoroughly familiar from your work in statics.

1/4

Units

Both the International System of metric units (SI) and the U.S. customary system of units are deﬁned and used in Vol. 2 Dynamics, although a stronger emphasis is placed on the metric system because it is
replacing the U.S. customary system. However, numerical conversion
from one system to the other will often be needed in U.S. engineering

*To some it is preferable to interpret Newton’s second law as meaning that the resultant
force acting on a particle is proportional to the time rate of change of momentum of the
particle and that this change is in the direction of the force. Both formulations are equally
correct when applied to a particle of constant mass.

Article 1/4

Units

7

practice for some years to come. To become familiar with each system, it
is necessary to think directly in that system. Familiarity with the new
system cannot be achieved simply by the conversion of numerical results from the old system.
Tables deﬁning the SI units and giving numerical conversions between U.S. customary and SI units are included inside the front cover of
the book. Charts comparing selected quantities in SI and U.S. customary units are included inside the back cover of the book to facilitate conversion and to help establish a feel for the relative size of units in both
systems.
The four fundamental quantities of mechanics, and their units and
symbols for the two systems, are summarized in the following table:

As shown in the table, in SI the units for mass, length, and time are
taken as base units, and the units for force are derived from Newton’s
second law of motion, Eq. 1/1. In the U.S. customary system the units
for force, length, and time are base units and the units for mass are derived from the second law.
The SI system is termed an absolute system because the standard
for the base unit kilogram (a platinum-iridium cylinder kept at the International Bureau of Standards near Paris, France) is independent of
the gravitational attraction of the earth. On the other hand, the U.S.
customary system is termed a gravitational system because the standard for the base unit pound (the weight of a standard mass located at
sea level and at a latitude of 45Њ) requires the presence of the gravitational ﬁeld of the earth. This distinction is a fundamental difference between the two systems of units.
In SI units, by deﬁnition, one newton is that force which will give a
one-kilogram mass an acceleration of one meter per second squared. In
the U.S. customary system a 32.1740-pound mass (1 slug) will have an
acceleration of one foot per second squared when acted on by a force of
one pound. Thus, for each system we have from Eq. 1/1

SI UNITS

U.S. CUSTOMARY UNITS

(1 N) ϭ (1 kg)(1 m/s2)
N ϭ kg ⅐ m/s2

(1 lb) ϭ (1 slug)(1 ft/sec2)
slug ϭ lb ⅐ sec2/ft

Omikron/PhotoResearchers, Inc.

*Also spelled metre.

The U.S. standard kilogram at the
National Bureau of Standards

8

Chapter 1

Introduction to Dynamics

In SI units, the kilogram should be used exclusively as a unit of
mass and never force. Unfortunately, in the MKS (meter, kilogram, second) gravitational system, which has been used in some countries for
many years, the kilogram has been commonly used both as a unit of
force and as a unit of mass.
In U.S. customary units, the pound is unfortunately used both as a
unit of force (lbf) and as a unit of mass (lbm). The use of the unit lbm is
especially prevalent in the speciﬁcation of the thermal properties of liquids and gases. The lbm is the amount of mass which weighs 1 lbf under
standard conditions (at a latitude of 45Њ and at sea level). In order to
avoid the confusion which would be caused by the use of two units for
mass (slug and lbm), in this textbook we use almost exclusively the unit
slug for mass. This practice makes dynamics much simpler than if the
lbm were used. In addition, this approach allows us to use the symbol lb
to always mean pound force.
Additional quantities used in mechanics and their equivalent base
units will be deﬁned as they are introduced in the chapters which follow.
However, for convenient reference these quantities are listed in one
place in the ﬁrst table inside the front cover of the book.
Professional organizations have established detailed guidelines for
the consistent use of SI units, and these guidelines have been followed
throughout this book. The most essential ones are summarized inside the
front cover, and you should observe these rules carefully.

1/5

Gravitation

Newton’s law of gravitation, which governs the mutual attraction
between bodies, is
FϭG

m1m2
r2

(1/2)

where F ϭ the mutual force of attraction between two particles
G ϭ a universal constant called the constant of gravitation
m1, m2 ϭ the masses of the two particles
r ϭ the distance between the centers of the particles
The value of the gravitational constant obtained from experimental data
is G ϭ 6.673(10Ϫ11) m3/(kg ⅐ s2). Except for some spacecraft applications,
the only gravitational force of appreciable magnitude in engineering is
the force due to the attraction of the earth. It was shown in Vol. 1 Statics, for example, that each of two iron spheres 100 mm in diameter is attracted to the earth with a gravitational force of 37.1 N, which is called
its weight, but the force of mutual attraction between them if they are
just touching is only 0.000 000 095 1 N.
Because the gravitational attraction or weight of a body is a force, it
should always be expressed in force units, newtons (N) in SI units and
pounds force (lb) in U.S. customary units. To avoid confusion, the word
“weight” in this book will be restricted to mean the force of gravitational attraction.

Article 1/5

Effect of Altitude
The force of gravitational attraction of the earth on a body depends
on the position of the body relative to the earth. If the earth were a
perfect homogeneous sphere, a body with a mass of exactly 1 kg would
be attracted to the earth by a force of 9.825 N on the surface of the
earth, 9.822 N at an altitude of 1 km, 9.523 N at an altitude of 100 km,
7.340 N at an altitude of 1000 km, and 2.456 N at an altitude equal to
the mean radius of the earth, 6371 km. Thus the variation in gravitational attraction of high-altitude rockets and spacecraft becomes a major
consideration.
Every object which falls in a vacuum at a given height near the surface of the earth will have the same acceleration g, regardless of its
mass. This result can be obtained by combining Eqs. 1/1 and 1/2 and
canceling the term representing the mass of the falling object. This combination gives
gϭ

Gme
R2

where me is the mass of the earth and R is the radius of the earth.* The
mass me and the mean radius R of the earth have been found through
experimental measurements to be 5.976(1024) kg and 6.371(106) m, respectively. These values, together with the value of G already cited,
when substituted into the expression for g, give a mean value of g ϭ
9.825 m/s2.
The variation of g with altitude is easily determined from the gravitational law. If g0 represents the absolute acceleration due to gravity at
sea level, the absolute value at an altitude h is
g ϭ g0

R2
(R ϩ h)2

where R is the radius of the earth.

Effect of a Rotating Earth
The acceleration due to gravity as determined from the gravitational law is the acceleration which would be measured from a set of
axes whose origin is at the center of the earth but which does not rotate with the earth. With respect to these “fixed” axes, then, this value
may be termed the absolute value of g. Because the earth rotates, the
acceleration of a freely falling body as measured from a position attached to the surface of the earth is slightly less than the absolute
value.
Accurate values of the gravitational acceleration as measured relative to the surface of the earth account for the fact that the earth is a
rotating oblate spheroid with flattening at the poles. These values may
*It can be proved that the earth, when taken as a sphere with a symmetrical distribution of
mass about its center, may be considered a particle with its entire mass concentrated at its
center.

Gravitation

9

10

Chapter 1

Introduction to Dynamics

be calculated to a high degree of accuracy from the 1980 International
Gravity Formula, which is
g ϭ 9.780 327(1 ϩ 0.005 279 sin2 ␥ ϩ 0.000 023 sin4 ␥ ϩ …)
where ␥ is the latitude and g is expressed in meters per second squared.
The formula is based on an ellipsoidal model of the earth and also accounts for the effect of the rotation of the earth.
The absolute acceleration due to gravity as determined for a nonrotating earth may be computed from the relative values to a close approximation by adding 3.382(10Ϫ2) cos2␥ m/s2, which removes the effect of the
rotation of the earth. The variation of both the absolute and the relative
values of g with latitude is shown in Fig. 1/1 for sea-level conditions.*

Figure 1/1
Standard Value of g
The standard value which has been adopted internationally for the
gravitational acceleration relative to the rotating earth at sea level and
at a latitude of 45Њ is 9.806 65 m/s2 or 32.1740 ft/sec2. This value differs
very slightly from that obtained by evaluating the International Gravity
Formula for ␥ ϭ 45Њ. The reason for the small difference is that the
earth is not exactly ellipsoidal, as assumed in the formulation of the International Gravity Formula.
The proximity of large land masses and the variations in the density
of the crust of the earth also inﬂuence the local value of g by a small but
detectable amount. In almost all engineering applications near the surface of the earth, we can neglect the difference between the absolute and
relative values of the gravitational acceleration, and the effect of local

*You will be able to derive these relations for a spherical earth after studying relative motion in Chapter 3.

Article 1/6

variations. The values of 9.81 m/s2 in SI units and 32.2 ft/sec2 in U.S.
customary units are used for the sea-level value of g.

Apparent Weight
The gravitational attraction of the earth on a body of mass m may
be calculated from the results of a simple gravitational experiment. The
body is allowed to fall freely in a vacuum, and its absolute acceleration is
measured. If the gravitational force of attraction or true weight of the
body is W, then, because the body falls with an absolute acceleration g,
Eq. 1/1 gives
W ϭ mg

(1/3)

The apparent weight of a body as determined by a spring balance,
calibrated to read the correct force and attached to the surface of the
earth, will be slightly less than its true weight. The difference is due to
the rotation of the earth. The ratio of the apparent weight to the apparent or relative acceleration due to gravity still gives the correct value of
mass. The apparent weight and the relative acceleration due to gravity
are, of course, the quantities which are measured in experiments conducted on the surface of the earth.

1/6

Dimensions

A given dimension such as length can be expressed in a number of
different units such as meters, millimeters, or kilometers. Thus, a dimension is different from a unit. The principle of dimensional homogeneity states that all physical relations must be dimensionally homogeneous;
that is, the dimensions of all terms in an equation must be the same. It is
customary to use the symbols L, M, T, and F to stand for length, mass,
time, and force, respectively. In SI units force is a derived quantity and
from Eq. 1/1 has the dimensions of mass times acceleration or
F ϭ ML/T 2
One important use of the dimensional homogeneity principle is to
check the dimensional correctness of some derived physical relation. We
can derive the following expression for the velocity v of a body of mass m
which is moved from rest a horizontal distance x by a force F:
Fx ϭ 1 mv2
2
1

where the 2 is a dimensionless coefﬁcient resulting from integration.
This equation is dimensionally correct because substitution of L, M, and
T gives
[MLTϪ2][L] ϭ [M][LTϪ1]

2

Dimensional homogeneity is a necessary condition for correctness of
a physical relation, but it is not sufﬁcient, since it is possible to construct

Dimensions

11

12

Chapter 1

Introduction to Dynamics

an equation which is dimensionally correct but does not represent a correct relation. You should perform a dimensional check on the answer to
every problem whose solution is carried out in symbolic form.

1/7

Solving Problems in Dynamics

The study of dynamics concerns the understanding and description of
the motions of bodies. This description, which is largely mathematical, enables predictions of dynamical behavior to be made. A dual thought process
is necessary in formulating this description. It is necessary to think in
terms of both the physical situation and the corresponding mathematical
description. This repeated transition of thought between the physical and
the mathematical is required in the analysis of every problem.
One of the greatest difﬁculties encountered by students is the inability to make this transition freely. You should recognize that the
mathematical formulation of a physical problem represents an ideal and
limiting description, or model, which approximates but never quite
matches the actual physical situation.
In Art. 1/8 of Vol. 1 Statics we extensively discussed the approach to
solving problems in statics. We assume therefore, that you are familiar
with this approach, which we summarize here as applied to dynamics.

Approximation in Mathematical Models
Construction of an idealized mathematical model for a given engineering problem always requires approximations to be made. Some of
these approximations may be mathematical, whereas others will be
physical. For instance, it is often necessary to neglect small distances,
angles, or forces compared with large distances, angles, or forces. If the
change in velocity of a body with time is nearly uniform, then an assumption of constant acceleration may be justiﬁed. An interval of motion which cannot be easily described in its entirety is often divided into
small increments, each of which can be approximated.
As another example, the retarding effect of bearing friction on the
motion of a machine may often be neglected if the friction forces are
small compared with the other applied forces. However, these same friction forces cannot be neglected if the purpose of the inquiry is to determine the decrease in efﬁciency of the machine due to the friction
process. Thus, the type of assumptions you make depends on what information is desired and on the accuracy required.
You should be constantly alert to the various assumptions called for
in the formulation of real problems. The ability to understand and make
use of the appropriate assumptions when formulating and solving engineering problems is certainly one of the most important characteristics
of a successful engineer.
Along with the development of the principles and analytical tools
needed for modern dynamics, one of the major aims of this book is to
provide many opportunities to develop the ability to formulate good
mathematical models. Strong emphasis is placed on a wide range of
practical problems which not only require you to apply theory but also
force you to make relevant assumptions.

Article 1/7

KEY CONCEPTS
Method of Attack
An effective method of attack is essential in the solution of dynamics problems, as for all engineering problems. Development of good
habits in formulating problems and in representing their solutions will
be an invaluable asset. Each solution should proceed with a logical sequence of steps from hypothesis to conclusion. The following sequence
of steps is useful in the construction of problem solutions.
1. Formulate the problem:
(a) State the given data.
(b) State the desired result.
(c) State your assumptions and approximations.
2. Develop the solution:
(a) Draw any needed diagrams, and include coordinates which are
appropriate for the problem at hand.
(b) State the governing principles to be applied to your solution.
(c) Make your calculations.
(d) Ensure that your calculations are consistent with the accuracy
justiﬁed by the data.
(e) Be sure that you have used consistent units throughout your
calculations.
(f ) Ensure that your answers are reasonable in terms of magnitudes, directions, common sense, etc.
(g) Draw conclusions.
The arrangement of your work should be neat and orderly. This will
help your thought process and enable others to understand your work.
The discipline of doing orderly work will help you to develop skill in problem formulation and analysis. Problems which seem complicated at ﬁrst
often become clear when you approach them with logic and discipline.

Application of Basic Principles
The subject of dynamics is based on a surprisingly few fundamental
concepts and principles which, however, can be extended and applied over
a wide range of conditions. The study of dynamics is valuable partly because it provides experience in reasoning from fundamentals. This experience cannot be obtained merely by memorizing the kinematic and dynamic
equations which describe various motions. It must be obtained through exposure to a wide variety of problem situations which require the choice,
use, and extension of basic principles to meet the given conditions.
In describing the relations between forces and the motions they produce, it is essential to deﬁne clearly the system to which a principle is to
be applied. At times a single particle or a rigid body is the system to be
isolated, whereas at other times two or more bodies taken together constitute the system.

Solving Problems in Dynamics

13

14

Chapter 1

Introduction to Dynamics

The deﬁnition of the system to be analyzed is made clear by constructing its free-body diagram. This diagram consists of a closed outline of the external boundary of the system. All bodies which contact
and exert forces on the system but are not a part of it are removed and
replaced by vectors representing the forces they exert on the isolated
system. In this way, we make a clear distinction between the action and
reaction of each force, and all forces on and external to the system are
accounted for. We assume that you are familiar with the technique of
drawing free-body diagrams from your prior work in statics.

Numerical versus Symbolic Solutions
In applying the laws of dynamics, we may use numerical values of
the involved quantities, or we may use algebraic symbols and leave the
answer as a formula. When numerical values are used, the magnitudes
of all quantities expressed in their particular units are evident at each
stage of the calculation. This approach is useful when we need to know
the magnitude of each term.
The symbolic solution, however, has several advantages over the
numerical solution:
1. The use of symbols helps to focus attention on the connection between
the physical situation and its related mathematical description.
2. A symbolic solution enables you to make a dimensional check at
every step, whereas dimensional homogeneity cannot be checked
when only numerical values are used.
3. We can use a symbolic solution repeatedly for obtaining answers to
the same problem with different units or different numerical values.
Thus, facility with both forms of solution is essential, and you should
practice each in the problem work.
In the case of numerical solutions, we repeat from Vol. 1 Statics our
convention for the display of results. All given data are taken to be exact,
and results are generally displayed to three signiﬁcant ﬁgures, unless the
leading digit is a one, in which case four signiﬁcant ﬁgures are displayed.

Solution Methods
Solutions to the various equations of dynamics can be obtained in
one of three ways.
1. Obtain a direct mathematical solution by hand calculation, using either algebraic symbols or numerical values. We can solve the large
majority of the problems this way.
2. Obtain graphical solutions for certain problems, such as the determination of velocities and accelerations of rigid bodies in twodimensional relative motion.
3. Solve the problem by computer. A number of problems in Vol. 2 Dynamics are designated as Computer-Oriented Problems. They appear at the end of the Review Problem sets and were selected to
illustrate the type of problem for which solution by computer offers
a distinct advantage.

Article 1/8

The choice of the most expedient method of solution is an important
aspect of the experience to be gained from the problem work. We emphasize, however, that the most important experience in learning mechanics lies in the formulation of problems, as distinct from their
solution per se.

1/8

CHAPTER REVIEW

This chapter has introduced the concepts, deﬁnitions, and units
used in dynamics, and has given an overview of the approach used to
formulate and solve problems in dynamics. Now that you have ﬁnished
this chapter, you should be able to do the following:
1. State Newton’s laws of motion.
2. Perform calculations using SI and U.S. customary units.
3. Express the law of gravitation and calculate the weight of an object.
4. Discuss the effects of altitude and the rotation of the earth on the
acceleration due to gravity.
5. Apply the principle of dimensional homogeneity to a given physical
relation.

© Mark Greenberg/VirginGalactic/Zuma Press

6. Describe the methodology used to formulate and solve dynamics
problems.

Virgin Galactic SpaceShip2 in gliding flight after release from its mothership WhiteKnight2.

Chapter Review

15

16

Chapter 1

Introduction to Dynamics

SAMPLE PROBLEM 1/1
A space-shuttle payload module weighs 100 lb when
resting on the surface of the earth at a latitude of 45Њ north.
(a) Determine the mass of the module in both slugs and
kilograms, and its surface-level weight in newtons.
(b) Now suppose the module is taken to an altitude of 200
miles above the surface of the earth and released there
with no velocity relative to the center of the earth.
Determine its weight under these conditions in both
pounds and newtons.
(c) Finally, suppose the module is ﬁxed inside the cargo bay of a space shuttle.
The shuttle is in a circular orbit at an altitude of 200 miles above the surface
of the earth. Determine the weight of the module in both pounds and
newtons under these conditions.
For the surface-level value of the acceleration of gravity relative to a rotating earth, use g ϭ 32.1740 ft/sec2 (9.80665 m/s2). For the absolute value relative
to a nonrotating earth, use g ϭ 32.234 ft/sec2 (9.825 m/s2). Round off all answers
using the rules of this textbook.

Solution.

ᕡ [W ϭ mg]

(a) From relationship 1/3, we have
W
100 lb
mϭ g ϭ
ϭ 3.11 slugs
32.1740 ft/sec2

Ans.

Here we have used the acceleration of gravity relative to the rotating earth, because that is the condition of the module in part (a). Note that we are using more
signiﬁcant ﬁgures in the acceleration of gravity than will normally be required in
this textbook (32.2 ft/sec2 and 9.81 m/s2 will normally sufﬁce).
From the table of conversion factors inside the front cover of the textbook,
we see that 1 pound is equal to 4.4482 newtons. Thus, the weight of the module
in newtons is

ᕢ

W ϭ 100 lb

΄4.4482 N΅ ϭ 445 N
1 lb

Ans.

Finally, its mass in kilograms is

ᕣ [W ϭ mg]

445 N
W
mϭ g ϭ
ϭ 45.4 kg
9.80665 m/s2

Ans.

As another route to the last result, we may convert from pounds mass to
kilograms. Again using the table inside the front cover, we have
m ϭ 100 lbm

΄0.45359 kg΅ ϭ 45.4 kg
1 lbm

We recall that 1 lbm is the amount of mass which under standard conditions has
a weight of 1 lb of force. We rarely refer to the U.S. mass unit lbm in this textbook series, but rather use the slug for mass. The sole use of slug, rather than
the unnecessary use of two units for mass, will prove to be powerful and simple.

Helpful Hints

ᕡ Our calculator indicates a result of

3.108099 ⅐ ⅐ ⅐ slugs. Using the rules
of signiﬁcant ﬁgure display used in
this textbook, we round the written
result to three signiﬁcant ﬁgures, or
3.11 slugs. Had the numerical result
begun with the digit 1, we would
have rounded the displayed answer
to four signiﬁcant ﬁgures.

ᕢ A good practice with unit conversion
is to multiply by a factor such as
4.4482 N
, which has a value of 1,
1 lb
because the numerator and the denominator are equivalent. Be sure
that cancellation of the units leaves
the units desired—here the units of
lb cancel, leaving the desired units
of N.

΄

΅

ᕣ Note that we are using a previously
calculated result (445 N). We must
be sure that when a calculated number is needed in subsequent calculations, it is obtained in the calculator
to its full accuracy (444.82 ⅐ ⅐ ⅐). If
necessary, numbers must be stored
in a calculator storage register and
then brought out of the register
when needed. We must not merely
punch 445 into our calculator and
proceed to divide by 9.80665—this
practice will result in loss of numerical accuracy. Some individuals like
to place a small indication of the
storage register used in the right
margin of the work paper, directly
beside the number stored.

Article 1/8

SAMPLE PROBLEM 1/1 (CONTINUED)
(b) We begin by calculating the absolute acceleration of gravity (relative to
the nonrotating earth) at an altitude of 200 miles.

΄g ϭ g

0

΅

R2
(R ϩ h)2

gh ϭ 32.234

3959
΄(3959 ϩ 200) ΅ ϭ 29.2 ft/sec
2

2

2

The weight at an altitude of 200 miles is then
Wh ϭ mgh ϭ 3.11(29.2) ϭ 90.8 lb

Ans.

We now convert Wh to units of newtons.
Wh ϭ 90.8 lb

΄4.4482 N΅ ϭ 404 N
1 lb

Ans.

As an alternative solution to part (b), we may use Newton’s universal law of
gravitation. In U.S. units,

΄F ϭ

΅

Gm1m2
r2

Wh ϭ

Gmem
(R ϩ h)

ϭ
2

[3.439(10Ϫ8)][4.095(1023)][3.11]
[(3959 ϩ 200)(5280)]

2

ϭ 90.8 lb
which agrees with our earlier result. We note that the weight of the module
when at an altitude of 200 mi is about 90% of its surface-level weight—it is not
weightless. We will study the effects of this weight on the motion of the module
in Chapter 3.
(c) The weight of an object (the force of gravitational attraction) does not
depend on the motion of the object. Thus the answers for part (c) are the same as
those in part (b).
Wh ϭ 90.8 lb

or

404 N

Ans.

This Sample Problem has served to eliminate certain commonly held and
persistent misconceptions. First, just because a body is raised to a typical shuttle
altitude, it does not become weightless. This is true whether the body is released
with no velocity relative to the center of the earth, is inside the orbiting shuttle,
or is in its own arbitrary trajectory. And second, the acceleration of gravity is not
zero at such altitudes. The only way to reduce both the acceleration of gravity
and the corresponding weight of a body to zero is to take the body to an inﬁnite
distance from the earth.

Chapter Review

17

18

Chapter 1

Introduction to Dynamics

PROBLEMS
(Refer to Table D/2 in Appendix D for relevant solarsystem values.)

1/6 Two uniform aluminum spheres are positioned as
shown. Determine the gravitational force which sphere A
exerts on sphere B. The value of R is 50 mm.
y

1/1 Determine your mass in slugs. Convert your weight
to newtons and calculate the corresponding mass in
kilograms.

B
30°

1/2 Determine the weight in newtons of a car which has
a mass of 1500 kg. Convert the given mass of the car
to slugs and calculate the corresponding weight in
pounds.
m = 1500 kg

R

8R

2R

x

A
Problem 1/6

1/7 At what altitude h above the north pole is the weight
of an object reduced to one-half of its earth-surface
value? Assume a spherical earth of radius R and express h in terms of R.
1/8 Determine the absolute weight and the weight relative to the rotating earth of a 90-kg man if he is standing on the surface of the earth at a latitude of 40°.

Problem 1/2

1/3 The weight of one dozen apples is 5 lb. Determine the
average mass of one apple in both SI and U.S. units
and the average weight of one apple in SI units. In the
present case, how applicable is the “rule of thumb”
that an average apple weighs 1 N?
1/4 For the given vectors V1 and V2, determine V1 ϩ V2,
V1 ϩ V2, V1 Ϫ V2, V1 ϫ V2, and V1 ⅐ V2. Consider the
vectors to be nondimensional.

1/9 A space shuttle is in a circular orbit at an altitude of
150 mi. Calculate the absolute value of g at this altitude and determine the corresponding weight of a
shuttle passenger who weighs 200 lb when standing
on the surface of the earth at a latitude of 45°. Are
the terms “zero-g” and “weightless,” which are
sometimes used to describe conditions aboard orbiting spacecraft, correct in the absolute sense?
1/10 Determine the angle ␪ at which a particle in
Jupiter’s circular orbit experiences equal attractions
from the sun and from Jupiter. Use Table D/2 of
Appendix D as needed.

y
V2 = 15
V1 = 12
4
3

m

Sun

30°

x
θ

Jupiter

Problem 1/4

1/5 The two 100-mm-diameter spheres constructed of different metals are located in deep space. Determine
the gravitational force F which the copper sphere
exerts on the titanium sphere if (a) d ϭ 2 m, and
(b) d ϭ 4 m.
Copper

Titanium
x
d
Problem 1/5

Not to scale
Problem 1/10

Article 1/8
1/11 Calculate the distance d from the center of the earth
at which a particle experiences equal attractions
from the earth and from the moon. The particle is
restricted to the line through the centers of the earth
and the moon. Justify the two solutions physically.
Refer to Table D/2 of Appendix D as needed.

Earth

Problems

19

1/14 Determine the ratio RA of the force exerted by the
sun on the moon to that exerted by the earth on the
moon for position A of the moon. Repeat for moon
position B.

Moon

d
Not to scale
Problem 1/11

1/12 Consider a woman standing on the earth with the
sun directly overhead. Determine the ratio Res of
the force which the earth exerts on the woman to
the force which the sun exerts on her. Neglect the
effects of the rotation and oblateness of the earth.
1/13 Consider a woman standing on the surface of the
earth when the moon is directly overhead. Determine the ratio Rem of the force which the earth exerts on the woman to the force which the moon
exerts on her. Neglect the effects of the rotation and
oblateness of the earth. Find the same ratio if we
now move the woman to a corresponding position on
the moon.

Problem 1/14

1/15 Check the following equation for dimensional homogeneity:
mv ϭ

͵

t2

t1

(F cos ␪) dt

where m is mass, v is velocity, F is force, ␪ is an
angle, and t is time.

Even if this car maintains a constant speed along the winding road, it accelerates laterally, and this acceleration
must be considered in the design of the car, its tires, and the roadway itself.
© Daniel DempsterPhotography/Alamy

Kinematics
of Particles

2

CHAPTER OUTLINE
2/1 Introduction
2/2 Rectilinear Motion
2/3 Plane Curvilinear Motion
2/4 Rectangular Coordinates (x-y)
2/5 Normal and Tangential Coordinates (n-t)
2/6 Polar Coordinates (r-␪)
2/7 Space Curvilinear Motion
2/8 Relative Motion (Translating Axes)
2/9 Constrained Motion of Connected Particles
2/10 Chapter Review

2/1

Introduction

Kinematics is the branch of dynamics which describes the motion of
bodies without reference to the forces which either cause the motion or
are generated as a result of the motion. Kinematics is often described as
the “geometry of motion.” Some engineering applications of kinematics
include the design of cams, gears, linkages, and other machine elements
to control or produce certain desired motions, and the calculation of
ﬂight trajectories for aircraft, rockets, and spacecraft. A thorough working knowledge of kinematics is a prerequisite to kinetics, which is the
study of the relationships between motion and the corresponding forces
which cause or accompany the motion.

Particle Motion
We begin our study of kinematics by ﬁrst discussing in this chapter
the motions of points or particles. A particle is a body whose physical dimensions are so small compared with the radius of curvature of its path
that we may treat the motion of the particle as that of a point. For example, the wingspan of a jet transport ﬂying between Los Angeles and
New York is of no consequence compared with the radius of curvature of
21

22

Chapter 2

Kinematics of Particles

its ﬂight path, and thus the treatment of the airplane as a particle or
point is an acceptable approximation.
We can describe the motion of a particle in a number of ways, and
the choice of the most convenient or appropriate way depends a great
deal on experience and on how the data are given. Let us obtain an
overview of the several methods developed in this chapter by referring
to Fig. 2/1, which shows a particle P moving along some general path
in space. If the particle is confined to a specified path, as with a bead
sliding along a ﬁxed wire, its motion is said to be constrained. If there
are no physical guides, the motion is said to be unconstrained. A small
rock tied to the end of a string and whirled in a circle undergoes constrained motion until the string breaks, after which instant its motion is
unconstrained.

t

z
B

P
A

y

R

n
z

φ

x
r

θ

Path
y

Choice of Coordinates
The position of particle P at any time t can be described by specifying its rectangular coordinates* x, y, z, its cylindrical coordinates r, ␪, z,
or its spherical coordinates R, ␪, ␾. The motion of P can also be described by measurements along the tangent t and normal n to the curve.
The direction of n lies in the local plane of the curve.† These last two
measurements are called path variables.
The motion of particles (or rigid bodies) can be described by using coordinates measured from ﬁxed reference axes (absolute-motion analysis)
or by using coordinates measured from moving reference axes (relativemotion analysis). Both descriptions will be developed and applied in the
articles which follow.
With this conceptual picture of the description of particle motion in
mind, we restrict our attention in the ﬁrst part of this chapter to the
case of plane motion where all movement occurs in or can be represented as occurring in a single plane. A large proportion of the motions
of machines and structures in engineering can be represented as plane
motion. Later, in Chapter 7, an introduction to three-dimensional motion is presented. We begin our discussion of plane motion with rectilinear motion, which is motion along a straight line, and follow it with a
description of motion along a plane curve.

x

Figure 2/1

2/2
–s

O

P
s

Δs

Figure 2/2

P′

+s

Rectilinear Motion

Consider a particle P moving along a straight line, Fig. 2/2. The position of P at any instant of time t can be speciﬁed by its distance s measured from some convenient reference point O ﬁxed on the line. At time
t ϩ ⌬t the particle has moved to PЈ and its coordinate becomes s ϩ ⌬s.
The change in the position coordinate during the interval ⌬t is called
the displacement ⌬s of the particle. The displacement would be negative
if the particle moved in the negative s-direction.
*Often called Cartesian coordinates, named after René Descartes (1596–1650), a French
mathematician who was one of the inventors of analytic geometry.
†

This plane is called the osculating plane, which comes from the Latin word osculari meaning “to kiss.” The plane which contains P and the two points A and B, one on either side of
P, becomes the osculating plane as the distances between the points approach zero.

Article 2/2

Rectilinear Motion

23

Velocity and Acceleration
The average velocity of the particle during the interval ⌬t is the displacement divided by the time interval or vav ϭ ⌬s/⌬t. As ⌬t becomes
smaller and approaches zero in the limit, the average velocity approaches
⌬s
the instantaneous velocity of the particle, which is v ϭ lim
or
⌬tl0 ⌬t
vϭ

ds
ϭ˙
s
dt

(2/1)

Thus, the velocity is the time rate of change of the position coordinate s.
The velocity is positive or negative depending on whether the corresponding displacement is positive or negative.
The average acceleration of the particle during the interval ⌬t is the
change in its velocity divided by the time interval or aav ϭ ⌬v/⌬t. As ⌬t
becomes smaller and approaches zero in the limit, the average acceleration approaches the instantaneous acceleration of the particle, which is
⌬v
a ϭ lim
or
⌬tl0 ⌬t
dv
ϭ˙
v
dt

or

aϭ

d2s
ϭ¨
s
dt2

(2/2)

The acceleration is positive or negative depending on whether the velocity is increasing or decreasing. Note that the acceleration would be
positive if the particle had a negative velocity which was becoming
less negative. If the particle is slowing down, the particle is said to be
decelerating.
Velocity and acceleration are actually vector quantities, as we will
see for curvilinear motion beginning with Art. 2/3. For rectilinear motion in the present article, where the direction of the motion is that of
the given straight-line path, the sense of the vector along the path is described by a plus or minus sign. In our treatment of curvilinear motion,
we will account for the changes in direction of the velocity and acceleration vectors as well as their changes in magnitude.
By eliminating the time dt between Eq. 2/1 and the ﬁrst of Eqs. 2/2,
we obtain a differential equation relating displacement, velocity, and acceleration.* This equation is
v dv ϭ a ds

or

s ˙ s
˙ ds ϭ ¨ ds

(2/3)

Equations 2/1, 2/2, and 2/3 are the differential equations for the rectilinear motion of a particle. Problems in rectilinear motion involving ﬁnite changes in the motion variables are solved by integration of these
basic differential relations. The position coordinate s, the velocity v, and
the acceleration a are algebraic quantities, so that their signs, positive
or negative, must be carefully observed. Note that the positive directions for v and a are the same as the positive direction for s.
*Differential quantities can be multiplied and divided in exactly the same way as other
algebraic quantities.

© Datacraft/Age FotostockAmerica, Inc.

aϭ

This sprinter will undergo rectilinear
acceleration until he reaches his terminal speed.

24

Chapter 2

Kinematics of Particles

s

(a)
ds ·
v =— = s
dt
1
t

t1

t2

t

v

dv ·
a =— = v
dt

(b)
1

Graphical Interpretations
Interpretation of the differential equations governing rectilinear
motion is considerably clariﬁed by representing the relationships among
s, v, a, and t graphically. Figure 2/3a is a schematic plot of the variation
of s with t from time t1 to time t2 for some given rectilinear motion. By
constructing the tangent to the curve at any time t, we obtain the slope,
which is the velocity v ϭ ds/dt. Thus, the velocity can be determined at
all points on the curve and plotted against the corresponding time as
shown in Fig. 2/3b. Similarly, the slope dv/dt of the v-t curve at any instant gives the acceleration at that instant, and the a-t curve can therefore be plotted as in Fig. 2/3c.
We now see from Fig. 2/3b that the area under the v-t curve during
time dt is v dt, which from Eq. 2/1 is the displacement ds. Consequently,
the net displacement of the particle during the interval from t1 to t2 is
the corresponding area under the curve, which is

͵

v
t1

t2

dt

t

s2

s1

a

ds ϭ

͵

t2

v dt

or

t1

s2 Ϫ s1 ϭ (area under v-t curve)

Similarly, from Fig. 2/3c we see that the area under the a-t curve during
time dt is a dt, which, from the ﬁrst of Eqs. 2/2, is dv. Thus, the net
change in velocity between t1 and t2 is the corresponding area under the
curve, which is

(c)

͵

a
t1

t2

dt

v1

t

a

͵

v2

v1

(a)
a

s2

ds

dv
—
ds

v
A
1
(b)

v

C
s1

B
a

Figure 2/4

dv ϭ

͵

t2

a dt

or

t1

v2 Ϫ v1 ϭ (area under a-t curve)

Note two additional graphical relations. When the acceleration a is
plotted as a function of the position coordinate s, Fig. 2/4a, the area
under the curve during a displacement ds is a ds, which, from Eq. 2/3, is
v dv ϭ d(v2/2). Thus, the net area under the curve between position coordinates s1 and s2 is

Figure 2/3

s1

v2

s2

v dv ϭ

͵

s2

s1

a ds

or

1
2
2
2 (v2 Ϫ v1 ) ϭ (area under a-s curve)

When the velocity v is plotted as a function of the position coordinate s,
Fig. 2/4b, the slope of the curve at any point A is dv/ds. By constructing
s the normal AB to the curve at this point, we see from the similar triangles that CB/v ϭ dv/ds. Thus, from Eq. 2/3, CB ϭ v(dv/ds) ϭ a, the acceleration. It is necessary that the velocity and position coordinate axes
have the same numerical scales so that the acceleration read on the position coordinate scale in meters (or feet), say, will represent the actual
acceleration in meters (or feet) per second squared.
The graphical representations described are useful not only in visualizing the relationships among the several motion quantities but also in
obtaining approximate results by graphical integration or differentiation. The latter case occurs when a lack of knowledge of the mathematis cal relationship prevents its expression as an explicit mathematical
function which can be integrated or differentiated. Experimental data
and motions which involve discontinuous relationships between the
variables are frequently analyzed graphically.

Article 2/2

KEY CONCEPTS
Analytical Integration
If the position coordinate s is known for all values of the time t, then
successive mathematical or graphical differentiation with respect to t
gives the velocity v and acceleration a. In many problems, however, the
functional relationship between position coordinate and time is unknown, and we must determine it by successive integration from the acceleration. Acceleration is determined by the forces which act on moving
bodies and is computed from the equations of kinetics discussed in subsequent chapters. Depending on the nature of the forces, the acceleration
may be speciﬁed as a function of time, velocity, or position coordinate, or
as a combined function of these quantities. The procedure for integrating
the differential equation in each case is indicated as follows.
(a) Constant Acceleration. When a is constant, the ﬁrst of Eqs. 2/2
and 2/3 can be integrated directly. For simplicity with s ϭ s0, v ϭ v0, and
t ϭ 0 designated at the beginning of the interval, then for a time interval t the integrated equations become

͵

͵ dt
͵ v dv ϭ a ͵ ds
v

t

dv ϭ a

v

v0

v ϭ v0 ϩ at

or

0
s

s0

v0

v2 ϭ v02 ϩ 2a(s Ϫ s0)

or

Substitution of the integrated expression for v into Eq. 2/1 and integration with respect to t give

͵

s

s0

͵ (v ϩ at) dt
t

ds ϭ

0

0

or

s ϭ s0 ϩ v0 t ϩ 1 at2
2

These relations are necessarily restricted to the special case where the
acceleration is constant. The integration limits depend on the initial and
ﬁnal conditions, which for a given problem may be different from those
used here. It may be more convenient, for instance, to begin the integration at some speciﬁed time t1 rather than at time t ϭ 0.
Caution: The foregoing equations have been integrated
for constant acceleration only. A common mistake is to
use these equations for problems involving variable acceleration, where they do not apply.
(b) Acceleration Given as a Function of Time, a ϭ ƒ(t). Substitution of the function into the ﬁrst of Eqs. 2/2 gives ƒ(t) ϭ dv/dt. Multiplying by dt separates the variables and permits integration. Thus,

͵

v

v0

͵ ƒ(t) dt
t

dv ϭ

0

͵ ƒ(t) dt
t

or

v ϭ v0 ϩ

0

Rectilinear Motion

25

26

Chapter 2

Kinematics of Particles

From this integrated expression for v as a function of t, the position coordinate s is obtained by integrating Eq. 2/1, which, in form, would be

͵

s

s0

͵ v dt
t

ds ϭ

͵ v dt
t

s ϭ s0 ϩ

or

0

0

If the indeﬁnite integral is employed, the end conditions are used to establish the constants of integration. The results are identical with those
obtained by using the deﬁnite integral.
If desired, the displacement s can be obtained by a direct solution of
s
the second-order differential equation ¨ ϭ ƒ(t) obtained by substitution
of ƒ(t) into the second of Eqs. 2/2.
(c) Acceleration Given as a Function of Velocity, a ϭ ƒ(v). Substitution of the function into the ﬁrst of Eqs. 2/2 gives ƒ(v) ϭ dv/dt, which
permits separating the variables and integrating. Thus,

͵ dt ϭ ͵
t

tϭ

v

0

v0

dv
ƒ(v)

This result gives t as a function of v. Then it would be necessary to solve
for v as a function of t so that Eq. 2/1 can be integrated to obtain the position coordinate s as a function of t.
Another approach is to substitute the function a ϭ ƒ(v) into the ﬁrst
of Eqs. 2/3, giving v dv ϭ ƒ(v) ds. The variables can now be separated
and the equation integrated in the form

͵

v

v dv
ϭ
v0 ƒ(v)

͵

s

ds

s ϭ s0 ϩ

or

s0

͵

v

v dv
v0 ƒ(v)

Note that this equation gives s in terms of v without explicit reference to t.
(d) Acceleration Given as a Function of Displacement, a ϭ ƒ(s).
Substituting the function into Eq. 2/3 and integrating give the form

͵

v

v0

v dv ϭ

͵

s

v2 ϭ v 0 2 ϩ 2

or

ƒ(s) ds

s0

͵

s

ƒ(s) ds

s0

Next we solve for v to give v ϭ g(s), a function of s. Now we can substitute ds/dt for v, separate variables, and integrate in the form

͵

s

ds
ϭ
s0 g(s)

͵ dt
t

0

or

tϭ

͵

s

s0

ds
g(s)

which gives t as a function of s. Finally, we can rearrange to obtain s as
a function of t.
In each of the foregoing cases when the acceleration varies according
to some functional relationship, the possibility of solving the equations by
direct mathematical integration will depend on the form of the function.
In cases where the integration is excessively awkward or difﬁcult, integration by graphical, numerical, or computer methods can be utilized.

Article 2/2

Rectilinear Motion

27

SAMPLE PROBLEM 2/1
The position coordinate of a particle which is conﬁned to move along a
straight line is given by s ϭ 2t3 Ϫ 24t ϩ 6, where s is measured in meters from a
convenient origin and t is in seconds. Determine (a) the time required for the
particle to reach a velocity of 72 m/s from its initial condition at t ϭ 0, (b) the acceleration of the particle when v ϭ 30 m/s, and (c) the net displacement of the
particle during the interval from t ϭ 1 s to t ϭ 4 s.

Solution.

The velocity and acceleration are obtained by successive differentiation of s with respect to the time. Thus,

[v ϭ ˙]
s

6
0

0

1

2

3

4

t, s

v ϭ 6t2 Ϫ 24 m/s

[a ϭ ˙]
v

38
s, m

a ϭ 12t m/s2
–26
72
2

(a) Substituting v ϭ 72 m/s into the expression for v gives us 72 ϭ 6t Ϫ 24,
from which t ϭ Ϯ4 s. The negative root describes a mathematical solution for t
ᕡ before the initiation of motion, so this root is of no physical interest. Thus, the
desired result is

v, m/s
30
0

tϭ4s

Ans.

0

2
Δ s1 – 2

–24

2

(b) Substituting v ϭ 30 m/s into the expression for v gives 30 ϭ 6t Ϫ 24, from

Δ s2 – 4

1

3

4

t, s

48
36

a, m/s 2

which the positive root is t ϭ 3 s, and the corresponding acceleration is
a ϭ 12(3) ϭ 36 m/s2

Ans.

(c) The net displacement during the speciﬁed interval is
⌬s ϭ s4 Ϫ s1

0

1

2

3

4

Helpful Hints

ᕡ Be alert to the proper choice of sign

or

⌬s ϭ [2(43) Ϫ 24(4) ϩ 6] Ϫ [2(13) Ϫ 24(1) ϩ 6]
ϭ 54 m

0

Ans.

ᕢ which represents the net advancement of the particle along the s-axis from the

position it occupied at t ϭ 1 s to its position at t ϭ 4 s.
To help visualize the motion, the values of s, v, and a are plotted against the
time t as shown. Because the area under the v-t curve represents displacement,
ᕣ we see that the net displacement from t ϭ 1 s to t ϭ 4 s is the positive area ⌬s2Ϫ4
less the negative area ⌬s1Ϫ2.

when taking a square root. When
the situation calls for only one answer, the positive root is not always
the one you may need.

ᕢ Note carefully the distinction between italic s for the position coordinate and the vertical s for seconds.

ᕣ Note from the graphs that the values for v are the slopes (s ) of the s-t
˙
curve and that the values for a are
the slopes (v ) of the v-t curve. Sug˙
gestion: Integrate v dt for each of the
two intervals and check the answer
for ⌬s. Show that the total distance
traveled during the interval t ϭ 1 s
to t ϭ 4 s is 74 m.

t, s

28

Chapter 2

Kinematics of Particles

SAMPLE PROBLEM 2/2
A particle moves along the x-axis with an initial velocity vx ϭ 50 ft/sec at the
origin when t ϭ 0. For the ﬁrst 4 seconds it has no acceleration, and thereafter it
is acted on by a retarding force which gives it a constant acceleration ax ϭ Ϫ10
ft/sec2. Calculate the velocity and the x-coordinate of the particle for the condiᕡ tions of t ϭ 8 sec and t ϭ 12 sec and ﬁnd the maximum positive x-coordinate
reached by the particle.

Solution.

ᕢ

Helpful Hints

ᕡ Learn to be ﬂexible with symbols.
The position coordinate x is just as
valid as s.

The velocity of the particle after t ϭ 4 sec is computed from

΄͵ dv ϭ ͵ a dt΅ ͵

vx

50

͵ dt
t

dvx ϭ Ϫ10

4

vx ϭ 90 Ϫ 10t ft/sec

ᕢ Note that we integrate to a general
time t and then substitute speciﬁc
values.

and is plotted as shown. At the speciﬁed times, the velocities are
t ϭ 8 sec,

vx ϭ 90 Ϫ 10(8) ϭ 10 ft/sec

t ϭ 12 sec,

vx ϭ 90 Ϫ 10(12) ϭ Ϫ30 ft/sec

Ans.

The x-coordinate of the particle at any time greater than 4 seconds is the distance traveled during the ﬁrst 4 seconds plus the distance traveled after the discontinuity in acceleration occurred. Thus,

΄͵ ds ϭ ͵ v dt΅

͵ (90 Ϫ 10t) dt ϭ Ϫ5t ϩ 90t Ϫ 80 ft

vx , ft/sec
50
1
–10

t

x ϭ 50(4) ϩ

2

4

0
0

4

8

12

For the two speciﬁed times,
–30

t ϭ 8 sec,

x ϭ Ϫ5(82) ϩ 90(8) Ϫ 80 ϭ 320 ft

t ϭ 12 sec,

x ϭ Ϫ5(122) ϩ 90(12) Ϫ 80 ϭ 280 ft

Ans.

The x-coordinate for t ϭ 12 sec is less than that for t ϭ 8 sec since the motion is
in the negative x-direction after t ϭ 9 sec. The maximum positive x-coordinate is,
then, the value of x for t ϭ 9 sec which is
xmax ϭ Ϫ5(92) ϩ 90(9) Ϫ 80 ϭ 325 ft

Ans.

ᕣ These displacements are seen to be the net positive areas under the v-t graph up
to the values of t in question.

ᕣ Show that the total distance traveled
by the particle in the 12 sec is 370 ft.

t, sec

Article 2/2

Rectilinear Motion

SAMPLE PROBLEM 2/3

29

s

The spring-mounted slider moves in the horizontal guide with negligible
friction and has a velocity v0 in the s-direction as it crosses the mid-position
where s ϭ 0 and t ϭ 0. The two springs together exert a retarding force to the
motion of the slider, which gives it an acceleration proportional to the displacement but oppositely directed and equal to a ϭ Ϫk2s, where k is constant. (The
constant is arbitrarily squared for later convenience in the form of the expressions.) Determine the expressions for the displacement s and velocity v as functions of the time t.

Solution I. Since the acceleration is speciﬁed in terms of the displacement, the
differential relation v dv ϭ a ds may be integrated. Thus,

ᕡ

͵ v dv ϭ ͵ Ϫk s ds ϩ C a constant,
2

or

1

Helpful Hints

k2s2
v2
ϭϪ
ϩ C1
2
2

ᕡ We have used an indeﬁnite integral
here and evaluated the constant of
integration. For practice, obtain the
same results by using the deﬁnite
integral with the appropriate limits.

When s ϭ 0, v ϭ v0, so that C1 ϭ v02/2, and the velocity becomes
v ϭ ϩΊv02 Ϫ k2s2
The plus sign of the radical is taken when v is positive (in the plus s-direction).
This last expression may be integrated by substituting v ϭ ds/dt. Thus,

ᕢ

͵ Ίv

ds
0

2

Ϫ k2s2

ϭ

͵ dt ϩ C a constant,
2

or

ks
1
ϭ t ϩ C2
sinϪ1
v0
k

ᕢ Again try the deﬁnite integral here

With the requirement of t ϭ 0 when s ϭ 0, the constant of integration becomes
C2 ϭ 0, and we may solve the equation for s so that
sϭ

v0

sin kt

Ans.

v ϭ v0 cos kt

as above.

Ans.

k

The velocity is v ϭ ˙, which gives
s

Solution II.

Since a ϭ ¨, the given relation may be written at once as
s
s
¨ ϩ k2s ϭ 0

This is an ordinary linear differential equation of second order for which the solution is well known and is
s ϭ A sin Kt ϩ B cos Kt
where A, B, and K are constants. Substitution of this expression into the differential equation shows that it satisﬁes the equation, provided that K ϭ k. The ves
locity is v ϭ ˙, which becomes
v ϭ Ak cos kt Ϫ Bk sin kt
The initial condition v ϭ v0 when t ϭ 0 requires that A ϭ v0/k, and the condition
s ϭ 0 when t ϭ 0 gives B ϭ 0. Thus, the solution is

ᕣ

sϭ

v0
k

sin kt

and

v ϭ v0 cos kt

Ans.

ᕣ This motion is called simple harmonic motion and is characteristic of
all oscillations where the restoring
force, and hence the acceleration, is
proportional to the displacement but
opposite in sign.

30

Chapter 2

Kinematics of Particles

SAMPLE PROBLEM 2/4
A freighter is moving at a speed of 8 knots when its engines are suddenly

ᕡ stopped. If it takes 10 minutes for the freighter to reduce its speed to 4 knots, determine and plot the distance s in nautical miles moved by the ship and its speed
v in knots as functions of the time t during this interval. The deceleration of the
ship is proportional to the square of its speed, so that a ϭ Ϫkv2.

Helpful Hints

ᕡ Recall that one knot is the speed of
one nautical mile (6076 ft) per hour.
Work directly in the units of nautical miles and hours.

Solution.

The speeds and the time are given, so we may substitute the expression for acceleration directly into the basic deﬁnition a ϭ dv/dt and integrate.
Thus,
Ϫkv2 ϭ

dv
dt

͵

dv
ϭ Ϫk dt
v2

8

1 1
Ϫ ϩ ϭ Ϫkt
v 8

ᕢ

v

vϭ

dv
ϭ Ϫk
v2

͵ dt
t

0

8
1 ϩ 8kt

ᕢ We choose to integrate to a general
value of v and its corresponding time
t so that we may obtain the variation
of v with t.

10

Now we substitute the end limits of v ϭ 4 knots and t ϭ 60 ϭ 1 hour and get
6
8
1 ϩ 8k(1/6)

kϭ

3 Ϫ1
mi
4

vϭ

8
1 ϩ 6t

Ans.

The speed is plotted against the time as shown.
The distance is obtained by substituting the expression for v into the definition v ϭ ds/dt and integrating. Thus,
8
ds
ϭ
1 ϩ 6t dt

͵ 18ϩdt6t ϭ ͵
t

0

s

0

ds

sϭ

4
ln (1 ϩ 6t)
3

Ans.

8
6
v, knots

4ϭ

4
2

The distance s is also plotted against the time as shown, and we see that the ship
6
has moved through a distance s ϭ 4 ln (1 ϩ 6) ϭ 4 ln 2 ϭ 0.924 mi (nautical) dur3
3
ing the 10 minutes.

0
0

2

4
6
t, min

8

10

2

4
6
t, min

8

10

s, mi (nautical)

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0

Article 2/2

PROBLEMS
Introductory Problems
Problems 2/1 through 2/6 treat the motion of a particle
which moves along the s-axis shown in the ﬁgure.
+ s, ft or m
–1

0

1

2

3

Problems 2/1–2/6

2/1 The velocity of a particle is given by v ϭ 20t2 Ϫ 100t ϩ
50, where v is in meters per second and t is in seconds.
Plot the velocity v and acceleration a versus time for
the ﬁrst 6 seconds of motion and evaluate the velocity
when a is zero.
2/2 The displacement of a particle is given by s ϭ 2t3 Ϫ
30t2 ϩ 100t Ϫ 50, where s is in feet and t is in seconds.
Plot the displacement, velocity, and acceleration as
functions of time for the ﬁrst 12 seconds of motion.
Determine the time at which the velocity is zero.

Problems

31

2/9 The acceleration of a particle is given by a ϭ 4t Ϫ 30,
where a is in meters per second squared and t is in
seconds. Determine the velocity and displacement as
functions of time. The initial displacement at t ϭ 0 is
s0 ϭ Ϫ5 m, and the initial velocity is v0 ϭ 3 m /s.
2/10 During a braking test, a car is brought to rest beginning from an initial speed of 60 mi/hr in a distance of
120 ft. With the same constant deceleration, what
would be the stopping distance s from an initial
speed of 80 mi/hr?
2/11 Ball 1 is launched with an initial vertical velocity
v1 ϭ 160 ft /sec. Three seconds later, ball 2 is
launched with an initial vertical velocity v2. Determine v2 if the balls are to collide at an altitude of
300 ft. At the instant of collision, is ball 1 ascending
or descending?
v1, v2
1
2

2/3 The velocity of a particle which moves along the s-axis
is given by v ϭ 2 ϩ 5t3/2, where t is in seconds and v is
in meters per second. Evaluate the displacement s,
velocity v, and acceleration a when t ϭ 4 s. The particle is at the origin s ϭ 0 when t ϭ 0.

Problem 2/11

2/4 The velocity of a particle along the s-axis is given by
v ϭ 5s3/2, where s is in millimeters and v is in millimeters per second. Determine the acceleration when s is
2 millimeters.

2/12 A projectile is ﬁred vertically with an initial velocity
of 200 m/s. Calculate the maximum altitude h
reached by the projectile and the time t after ﬁring
for it to return to the ground. Neglect air resistance
and take the gravitational acceleration to be constant at 9.81 m /s2.

2/5 The position of a particle in millimeters is given by
s ϭ 27 Ϫ 12t ϩ t2, where t is in seconds. Plot the s-t
and v-t relationships for the ﬁrst 9 seconds. Determine the net displacement ⌬s during that interval
and the total distance D traveled. By inspection of the
s-t relationship, what conclusion can you reach regarding the acceleration?

2/13 A ball is thrown vertically upward with an initial
speed of 80 ft/sec from the base A of a 50-ft cliff.
Determine the distance h by which the ball clears
the top of the cliff and the time t after release for the
ball to land at B. Also, calculate the impact velocity
vB. Neglect air resistance and the small horizontal
motion of the ball.

2/6 The velocity of a particle which moves along the s-axis
is given by ˙ ϭ 40 Ϫ 3t2 m/s, where t is in seconds.
s
Calculate the displacement ⌬s of the particle during
the interval from t ϭ 2 s to t ϭ 4 s.
2/7 Calculate the constant acceleration a in g’s which
the catapult of an aircraft carrier must provide to
produce a launch velocity of 180 mi/hr in a distance
of 300 ft. Assume that the carrier is at anchor.
2/8 A particle moves along a straight line with a velocity
in millimeters per second given by v ϭ 400 Ϫ 16t2,
where t is in seconds. Calculate the net displacement
⌬s and total distance D traveled during the ﬁrst
6 seconds of motion.

h
B

50′
v0
A

Problem 2/13

32

Chapter 2

Kinematics of Particles

2/14 In the pinewood-derby event shown, the car is released from rest at the starting position A and then
rolls down the incline and on to the ﬁnish line C.
If the constant acceleration down the incline is
9 ft/sec2 and the speed from B to C is essentially constant, determine the time duration tAC for the race.
The effects of the small transition area at B can be
neglected.
20°

2/17 The car is traveling at a constant speed v0 ϭ 100
km/h on the level portion of the road. When the
6-percent (tan ␪ ϭ 6 /100) incline is encountered, the
driver does not change the throttle setting and consequently the car decelerates at the constant rate
g sin ␪. Determine the speed of the car (a) 10 seconds after passing point A and (b) when s ϭ 100 m.
s

v0
A

θ

B

A

C

10′

Problem 2/16

12′

Representative Problems

Problem 2/14

2/15 Starting from rest at home plate, a baseball player
runs to ﬁrst base (90 ft away). He uniformly accelerates over the ﬁrst 10 ft to his maximum speed, which
is then maintained until he crosses ﬁrst base. If the
overall run is completed in 4 seconds, determine his
maximum speed, the acceleration over the ﬁrst 10 feet,
and the time duration of the acceleration.
t=0

t = 4 sec

2/18 In traveling a distance of 3 km between points A and
D, a car is driven at 100 km/h from A to B for t seconds and 60 km/h from C to D also for t seconds. If
the brakes are applied for 4 seconds between B and
C to give the car a uniform deceleration, calculate t
and the distance s between A and B.
100 km/h

60 km/h

A

B

C

D

s
3 km
10′

80′
Problem 2/18
Problem 2/15

2/16 The graph shows the displacement-time history for
the rectilinear motion of a particle during an 8-second
interval. Determine the average velocity vav during
the interval and, to within reasonable limits of accuracy, ﬁnd the instantaneous velocity v when t ϭ 4 s.

2/19 During an 8-second interval, the velocity of a particle
moving in a straight line varies with time as shown.
Within reasonable limits of accuracy, determine the
amount ⌬a by which the acceleration at t ϭ 4 s exceeds
the average acceleration during the interval. What is
the displacement ⌬s during the interval?
14

8
s, m

10

12

6

10

4

v, m/s

6

2
0
0

8

2

4
t, s

Problem 2/16

6

8

4
2
0
0

2

4
t, s

Problem 2/19

6

8

Article 2/2
2/20 A particle moves along the positive x-axis with an
acceleration ax in meters per second squared which
increases linearly with x expressed in millimeters, as
shown on the graph for an interval of its motion. If
the velocity of the particle at x ϭ 40 mm is 0.4 m/s,
determine the velocity at x ϭ 120 mm.
ax, m/s2
4

Problems

33

2/22 A train which is traveling at 80 mi/hr applies its
brakes as it reaches point A and slows down with a
constant deceleration. Its decreased velocity is observed to be 60 mi/hr as it passes a point 1/2 mi beyond A. A car moving at 50 mi/hr passes point B at
the same instant that the train reaches point A. In
an unwise effort to beat the train to the crossing, the
driver “steps on the gas.” Calculate the constant acceleration a that the car must have in order to beat
the train to the crossing by 4 sec and ﬁnd the velocity v of the car as it reaches the crossing.

2
A

Train

0
120

80 mi/hr

x, mm

/ hr

mi

Problem 2/20

s

θ

50

mi

2/21 A girl rolls a ball up an incline and allows it to return to her. For the angle ␪ and ball involved, the
acceleration of the ball along the incline is constant at 0.25g, directed down the incline. If the
ball is released with a speed of 4 m/s, determine
the distance s it moves up the incline before reversing its direction and the total time t required
for the ball to return to the child’s hand.

1.3

40

1 mi

B
Car

Problem 2/22

2/23 Car A is traveling at a constant speed vA ϭ 130 km/h
at a location where the speed limit is 100 km/h. The
police ofﬁcer in car P observes this speed via radar.
At the moment when A passes P, the police car begins to accelerate at the constant rate of 6 m/s2 until
a speed of 160 km/h is achieved, and that speed is
then maintained. Determine the distance required
for the police ofﬁcer to overtake car A. Neglect any
nonrectilinear motion of P.

Problem 2/21

A

vA
P
Problem 2/23

2/24 Repeat the previous problem, only now the driver of
car A is traveling at vA ϭ 130 km/h as it passes P,
but over the next 5 seconds, the car uniformly decelerates to the speed limit of 100 km/h, and after that
the speed limit is maintained. If the motion of
the police car P remains as described in the previous
problem, determine the distance required for the
police ofﬁcer to overtake car A.

Chapter 2

Kinematics of Particles

2/25 Repeat Prob. 2/23, only now the driver of car A sees
and reacts very unwisely to the police car P. Car A is
traveling at vA ϭ 130 km/h as it passes P, but over
the next 5 seconds, the car uniformly accelerates to
150 km/h, after which that speed is maintained. If
the motion of the police car P remains as described
in Prob. 2/23, determine the distance required for
the police ofﬁcer to overtake car A.
2/26 The 14-in. spring is compressed to an 8-in. length,
where it is released from rest and accelerates block A.
The acceleration has an initial value of 400 ft /sec2
and then decreases linearly with the x-movement of
the block, reaching zero when the spring regains its
original 14-in. length. Calculate the time t for the
block to go (a) 3 in. and (b) 6 in.

160
140
120
100
v, ft/sec

34

80
60
40
20

8″

0
0
A

2

x

4

6

8

10

t, sec
Problem 2/28

14″

Problem 2/26

2/27 A single-stage rocket is launched vertically from
rest, and its thrust is programmed to give the rocket
a constant upward acceleration of 6 m/s2. If the fuel
is exhausted 20 s after launch, calculate the maximum velocity vm and the subsequent maximum altitude h reached by the rocket.
2/28 An electric car is subjected to acceleration tests
along a straight and level test track. The resulting v-t
data are closely modeled over the ﬁrst 10 seconds by
the function v ϭ 24t Ϫ t2 ϩ 5Ίt, where t is the time
in seconds and v is the velocity in feet per second.
Determine the displacement s as a function of time
over the interval 0 Յ t Յ 10 sec and specify its value
at time t ϭ 10 sec.

2/29 A particle starts from rest at x ϭ Ϫ2 m and moves
along the x-axis with the velocity history shown. Plot
the corresponding acceleration and the displacement
histories for the 2 seconds. Find the time t when the
particle crosses the origin.
v, m/s
3

0
0

2.0
0.5

1.0
t, s

1.5

–1

Problem 2/29

2/30 A retarding force is applied to a body moving in a
straight line so that, during an interval of its motion, its speed v decreases with increased position coordinate s according to the relation v2 ϭ k/s, where k
is a constant. If the body has a forward speed of
2 in./sec and its position coordinate is 9 in. at time
t ϭ 0, determine the speed v at t ϭ 3 sec.

Article 2/2
2/31 The deceleration of the mass center G of a car during a crash test is measured by an accelerometer
with the results shown, where the distance x
moved by G after impact is 0.8 m. Obtain a close
approximation to the impact velocity v from the
data given.

Problems

35

2/33 If the velocity v of a particle moving along a straight
line decreases linearly with its displacement s from
20 m/s to a value approaching zero at s ϭ 30 m, determine the acceleration a of the particle when
s ϭ 15 m and show that the particle never reaches
the 30-m displacement.

20
G
v, m/s
x
0
0

Deceleration

10g

30
s, m

8g

Problem 2/33

6g
4g
2g
0

0.2

0.4
x, m

0.6

0.8

Problem 2/31

2/32 A sprinter reaches his maximum speed vmax in
2.5 seconds from rest with constant acceleration. He
then maintains that speed and ﬁnishes the 100 yards
in the overall time of 9.60 seconds. Determine his
maximum speed vmax.

2/34 A car starts from rest with an acceleration of 6 m/s2
which decreases linearly with time to zero in 10 seconds, after which the car continues at a constant
speed. Determine the time t required for the car to
travel 400 m from the start.
2/35 Packages enter the 10-ft chute at A with a speed of
4 ft/sec and have a 0.3g acceleration from A to B. If
the packages come to rest at C, calculate the constant
acceleration a of the packages from B to C. Also ﬁnd
the time required for the packages to go from A to C.
A

100 yd
t=0

t = 2.5 sec

t = 9.60 sec
10
′

B

C
12′

Problem 2/32

Problem 2/35

36

Chapter 2

Kinematics of Particles

2/36 In an archery test, the acceleration of the arrow decreases linearly with distance s from its initial value
of 16,000 ft/sec2 at A upon release to zero at B after
a travel of 24 in. Calculate the maximum velocity v
of the arrow.

A

2/39 The body falling with speed v0 strikes and maintains
contact with the platform supported by a nest of
springs. The acceleration of the body after impact is
a ϭ g Ϫ cy, where c is a positive constant and y is
measured from the original platform position. If the
maximum compression of the springs is observed to
be ym, determine the constant c.
v0

B
24″

y
s

Problem 2/39

Problem 2/36

2/37 The 230,000-lb space-shuttle orbiter touches down at
about 220 mi/hr. At 200 mi/hr its drag parachute
deploys. At 35 mi/hr, the chute is jettisoned from the
orbiter. If the deceleration in feet per second squared
during the time that the chute is deployed is
Ϫ0.0003v2 (speed v in feet per second), determine the
corresponding distance traveled by the orbiter. Assume
no braking from its wheel brakes.

2/40 Particle 1 is subjected to an acceleration a ϭ Ϫkv,
particle 2 is subjected to a ϭ Ϫkt, and particle 3 is
subjected to a ϭ Ϫks. All three particles start at the
origin s ϭ 0 with an initial velocity v0 ϭ 10 m/s at
time t ϭ 0, and the magnitude of k is 0.1 for all three
particles (note that the units of k vary from case to
case). Plot the position, velocity, and acceleration versus time for each particle over the range 0 Յ t Յ 10 s.
2/41 The steel ball A of diameter D slides freely on the
horizontal rod which leads to the pole face of the
electromagnet. The force of attraction obeys an
inverse-square law, and the resulting acceleration of
the ball is a ϭ K /(L Ϫ x)2, where K is a measure of
the strength of the magnetic ﬁeld. If the ball is
released from rest at x ϭ 0, determine the velocity v
with which it strikes the pole face.
L
x
D

Problem 2/37

2/38 Reconsider the rollout of the space-shuttle orbiter of
the previous problem. The drag chute is deployed at
200 mi/hr, the wheel brakes are applied at 100 mi/hr
until wheelstop, and the drag chute is jettisoned at
35 mi/hr. If the drag chute results in a deceleration
of Ϫ0.0003v2 (in feet per second squared when the
speed v is in feet per second) and the wheel brakes
cause a constant deceleration of 5 ft/sec2, determine
the distance traveled from 200 mi/hr to wheelstop.

A
B
Problem 2/41

2/42 A certain lake is proposed as a landing area for large
jet aircraft. The touchdown speed of 100 mi/hr upon
contact with the water is to be reduced to 20 mi/hr
in a distance of 1500 ft. If the deceleration is proportional to the square of the velocity of the aircraft
through the water, a ϭ ϪKv2, ﬁnd the value of the
design parameter K, which would be a measure of
the size and shape of the landing gear vanes that
plow through the water. Also ﬁnd the time t elapsed
during the speciﬁed interval.

Article 2/2
2/43 The electronic throttle control of a model train is programmed so that the train speed varies with position
as shown in the plot. Determine the time t required
for the train to complete one lap.

1m

1m

Speed v, m/s

s
2m

Problems

37

2/46 The acceleration ax of the piston in a small reciprocating engine is given in the following table in terms
of the position x of the piston measured from the top
of its stroke. From a plot of the data, determine to
within two-signiﬁcant-ﬁgure accuracy the maximum
velocity vmax reached by the piston.
ax, m/s2
4950
4340
3740
2580
1490
476

x, m
0
0.0075
0.015
0.030
0.045
0.060

x, m
0.075
0.090
0.105
0.120
0.135
0.150

ax, m/s2
Ϫ450
Ϫ1265
Ϫ1960
Ϫ2510
Ϫ2910
Ϫ3150

x

0.250
0.125
0
0

2

_
2+ π 2+π
2

__
4 + π 2 + 3π 4 + 2π
2

Distance s, m
Problem 2/43

2/44 A particle moving along the s-axis has a velocity
given by v ϭ 18 Ϫ 2t2 ft/sec, where t is in seconds.
When t ϭ 0, the position of the particle is given by
s0 ϭ Ϫ3 ft. For the ﬁrst 5 seconds of motion, determine the total distance D traveled, the net displacement ⌬s, and the value of s at the end of the interval.
2/45 The cone falling with a speed v0 strikes and penetrates the block of packing material. The acceleration of the cone after impact is a ϭ g Ϫ cy2, where c
is a positive constant and y is the penetration distance. If the maximum penetration depth is observed to be ym, determine the constant c.
v0

Problem 2/46

2/47 The aerodynamic resistance to motion of a car is
nearly proportional to the square of its velocity. Additional frictional resistance is constant, so that the
acceleration of the car when coasting may be written
a ϭ ϪC1 Ϫ C2v2, where C1 and C2 are constants
which depend on the mechanical conﬁguration of
the car. If the car has an initial velocity v0 when the
engine is disengaged, derive an expression for the
distance D required for the car to coast to a stop.

y

Problem 2/45
v
Problem 2/47

38

Chapter 2

Kinematics of Particles

2/48 A subway train travels between two of its station
stops with the acceleration schedule shown. Determine the time interval ⌬t during which the train
brakes to a stop with a deceleration of 2 m/s2 and
ﬁnd the distance s between stations.

2/51 A projectile is fired horizontally into a resisting
medium with a velocity v0, and the resulting deceleration is equal to cvn, where c and n are constants
and v is the velocity within the medium. Find the
expression for the velocity v of the projectile in
terms of the time t of penetration.

a, m/s2
2
1
t, s

0
8

6

Δt

10

2/52 The horizontal motion of the plunger and shaft is arrested by the resistance of the attached disk which
moves through the oil bath. If the velocity of the
plunger is v0 in the position A where x ϭ 0 and t ϭ 0,
and if the deceleration is proportional to v so that
a ϭ Ϫkv, derive expressions for the velocity v and
position coordinate x in terms of the time t. Also express v in terms of x.
A

–2

x

v

Problem 2/48

2/49 Compute the impact speed of a body released from
rest at an altitude h ϭ 500 mi. (a) Assume a constant
gravitational acceleration gm0 ϭ 32.2 ft /sec2 and (b)
account for the variation of g with altitude (refer to
Art. 1/5). Neglect the effects of atmospheric drag.

Oil

Problem 2/52

2/53 On its takeoff roll, the airplane starts from rest and
accelerates according to a ϭ a0 Ϫkv2, where a0 is the
constant acceleration resulting from the engine
thrust and Ϫkv2 is the acceleration due to aerodynamic drag. If a0 ϭ 2 m/s2, k ϭ 0.00004 mϪ1, and v
is in meters per second, determine the design length
of runway required for the airplane to reach the
takeoff speed of 250 km/h if the drag term is (a) excluded and (b) included.

h

R

Problem 2/49

2/50 Compute the impact speed of body A which is released from rest at an altitude h ϭ 750 mi above the
surface of the moon. (a) First assume a constant
gravitational acceleration gm0 ϭ 5.32 ft /sec2 and
(b) then account for the variation of gm with altitude
(refer to Art. 1/5).

2160 mi

h

A

Problem 2/50

v0 = 0

v = 250 km/h

s
Problem 2/53

Article 2/2
2/54 A test projectile is ﬁred horizontally into a viscous
liquid with a velocity v0. The retarding force is proportional to the square of the velocity, so that the
acceleration becomes a ϭ Ϫkv2. Derive expressions
for the distance D traveled in the liquid and the corresponding time t required to reduce the velocity to
v0 /2. Neglect any vertical motion.

au = –g – kv2

ad = –g + kv2

y
100 ft/sec

Problem 2/56

v

Problem 2/54

2/55 A bumper, consisting of a nest of three springs, is
used to arrest the horizontal motion of a large mass
which is traveling at 40 ft/sec as it contacts the
bumper. The two outer springs cause a deceleration
proportional to the spring deformation. The center
spring increases the deceleration rate when the compression exceeds 6 in. as shown on the graph. Determine the maximum compression x of the outer
springs.
Deceleration
ft/sec2
3000
2000
1000
0
0

39

h

x

v0

Problems

6

12

x, in.

᭤ 2/57 The vertical acceleration of a certain solid-fuel rocket
is given by a ϭ keϪbt Ϫ cv Ϫ g, where k, b, and c are
constants, v is the vertical velocity acquired, and g is
the gravitational acceleration, essentially constant for
atmospheric ﬂight. The exponential term represents
the effect of a decaying thrust as fuel is burned, and
the term Ϫcv approximates the retardation due to
atmospheric resistance. Determine the expression for
the vertical velocity of the rocket t seconds after ﬁring.
᭤ 2/58 The preliminary design for a rapid-transit system
calls for the train velocity to vary with time as
shown in the plot as the train runs the two miles between stations A and B. The slopes of the cubic transition curves (which are of form a ϩ bt ϩ ct2 ϩ dt3)
are zero at the end points. Determine the total run
time t between the stations and the maximum acceleration.
A

B
2 mi

40 ft/sec

v, mi/hr
Cubic functions
80

Problem 2/55

2/56 When the effect of aerodynamic drag is included, the
y-acceleration of a baseball moving vertically upward
is au ϭ Ϫg Ϫ kv2, while the acceleration when the
ball is moving downward is ad ϭ Ϫg ϩ kv2, where k is
a positive constant and v is the speed in feet per second. If the ball is thrown upward at 100 ft/sec from
essentially ground level, compute its maximum height
h and its speed vƒ upon impact with the ground. Take
k to be 0.002 ftϪ1 and assume that g is constant.

0
15

Δt

A

15
B

t, sec

Problem 2/58

40

Chapter 2

Kinematics of Particles

2/3

Plane Curvilinear Motion

We now treat the motion of a particle along a curved path which lies
in a single plane. This motion is a special case of the more general threedimensional motion introduced in Art. 2/1 and illustrated in Fig. 2/1. If we
let the plane of motion be the x-y plane, for instance, then the coordinates
z and ␾ of Fig. 2/1 are both zero, and R becomes the same as r. As mentioned previously, the vast majority of the motions of points or particles
encountered in engineering practice can be represented as plane motion.
Before pursuing the description of plane curvilinear motion in any
speciﬁc set of coordinates, we will ﬁrst use vector analysis to describe
the motion, since the results will be independent of any particular coordinate system. What follows in this article constitutes one of the most
basic concepts in dynamics, namely, the time derivative of a vector.
Much analysis in dynamics utilizes the time rates of change of vector
quantities. You are therefore well advised to master this topic at the
outset because you will have frequent occasion to use it.
Consider now the continuous motion of a particle along a plane curve
as represented in Fig. 2/5. At time t the particle is at position A, which is
located by the position vector r measured from some convenient ﬁxed origin O. If both the magnitude and direction of r are known at time t, then
the position of the particle is completely speciﬁed. At time t ϩ ⌬t, the
particle is at AЈ, located by the position vector r ϩ ⌬r. We note, of course,
that this combination is vector addition and not scalar addition. The displacement of the particle during time ⌬t is the vector ⌬r which represents
the vector change of position and is clearly independent of the choice of
origin. If an origin were chosen at some different location, the position
vector r would be changed, but ⌬r would be unchanged. The distance
actually traveled by the particle as it moves along the path from A to AЈ
is the scalar length ⌬s measured along the path. Thus, we distinguish
between the vector displacement ⌬r and the scalar distance ⌬s.

Velocity
The average velocity of the particle between A and AЈ is deﬁned as
vav ϭ ⌬r/⌬t, which is a vector whose direction is that of ⌬r and whose
magnitude is the magnitude of ⌬r divided by ⌬t. The average speed of

Path of
particle
v′
A′

r + Δr

Δs

Δr

Δv

A′
v

A

a

v′
v

r

A

O

Figure 2/5

A

Article 2/3

the particle between A and AЈ is the scalar quotient ⌬s/⌬t. Clearly, the
magnitude of the average velocity and the speed approach one another
as the interval ⌬t decreases and A and AЈ become closer together.
The instantaneous velocity v of the particle is deﬁned as the limiting
value of the average velocity as the time interval approaches zero. Thus,
v ϭ lim

⌬tl0

⌬r
⌬t

We observe that the direction of ⌬r approaches that of the tangent to
the path as ⌬t approaches zero and, thus, the velocity v is always a vector tangent to the path.
We now extend the basic deﬁnition of the derivative of a scalar
quantity to include a vector quantity and write
vϭ

dr
ϭ˙
r
dt

(2/4)

The derivative of a vector is itself a vector having both a magnitude and
a direction. The magnitude of v is called the speed and is the scalar
v ϭ ͉v ͉ ϭ

ds
ϭ˙
s
dt

At this point we make a careful distinction between the magnitude
of the derivative and the derivative of the magnitude. The magnitude of
the derivative can be written in any one of the several ways ͉dr/dt͉ ϭ
͉ ˙ ͉ ϭ ˙ ϭ ͉v͉ ϭ v and represents the magnitude of the velocity, or the
r
s
speed, of the particle. On the other hand, the derivative of the magnir
tude is written d͉r͉/dt ϭ dr/dt ϭ ˙, and represents the rate at which the
length of the position vector r is changing. Thus, these two derivatives
have two entirely different meanings, and we must be extremely careful
to distinguish between them in our thinking and in our notation. For
this and other reasons, you are urged to adopt a consistent notation for
handwritten work for all vector quantities to distinguish them from
scalar quantities. For simplicity the underline v is recommended. Other
ˆ
v v
handwritten symbols such as 9, ~, and v are sometimes used.
With the concept of velocity as a vector established, we return to Fig.
2/5 and denote the velocity of the particle at A by the tangent vector v and
the velocity at AЈ by the tangent vЈ. Clearly, there is a vector change in
the velocity during the time ⌬t. The velocity v at A plus (vectorially) the
change ⌬v must equal the velocity at AЈ, so we can write vЈ Ϫ v ϭ ⌬v. Inspection of the vector diagram shows that ⌬v depends both on the change
in magnitude (length) of v and on the change in direction of v. These two
changes are fundamental characteristics of the derivative of a vector.

Acceleration
The average acceleration of the particle between A and AЈ is deﬁned
as ⌬v/⌬t, which is a vector whose direction is that of ⌬v. The magnitude
of this average acceleration is the magnitude of ⌬v divided by ⌬t.

Plane Curvilinear Motion

41

42

Chapter 2

Kinematics of Particles

The instantaneous acceleration a of the particle is deﬁned as the
limiting value of the average acceleration as the time interval approaches zero. Thus,
a ϭ lim

⌬tl0

⌬v
⌬t

By deﬁnition of the derivative, then, we write
aϭ

dv
ϭ˙
v
dt

(2/5)

As the interval ⌬t becomes smaller and approaches zero, the direction of
the change ⌬v approaches that of the differential change dv and, thus,
of a. The acceleration a, then, includes the effects of both the change in
magnitude of v and the change of direction of v. It is apparent, in general, that the direction of the acceleration of a particle in curvilinear
motion is neither tangent to the path nor normal to the path. We do observe, however, that the acceleration component which is normal to the
path points toward the center of curvature of the path.

Visualization of Motion
A further approach to the visualization of acceleration is shown in
Fig. 2/6, where the position vectors to three arbitrary positions on the
path of the particle are shown for illustrative purpose. There is a velocity
vector tangent to the path corresponding to each position vector, and the
r
relation is v ϭ ˙. If these velocity vectors are now plotted from some arbitrary point C, a curve, called the hodograph, is formed. The derivatives
of these velocity vectors will be the acceleration vectors a ϭ ˙ which are
v
tangent to the hodograph. We see that the acceleration has the same relation to the velocity as the velocity has to the position vector.
The geometric portrayal of the derivatives of the position vector r
and velocity vector v in Fig. 2/5 can be used to describe the derivative of
any vector quantity with respect to t or with respect to any other scalar
variable. Now that we have used the deﬁnitions of velocity and acceleration to introduce the concept of the derivative of a vector, it is important
to establish the rules for differentiating vector quantities. These rules

·
v3 = r3
Path

·
a 3 = v3

·
a 2 = v2

·
v2 = r2

r3

Hodograph

·
a1 = v1
v3

v2

r2

O
r1

v1

·
v1 = r1
C

Figure 2/6

Article 2/4

Rectangular Coordinates (x-y)

43

are the same as for the differentiation of scalar quantities, except for the
case of the cross product where the order of the terms must be preserved. These rules are covered in Art. C/7 of Appendix C and should be
reviewed at this point.
Three different coordinate systems are commonly used for describing
the vector relationships for curvilinear motion of a particle in a plane: rectangular coordinates, normal and tangential coordinates, and polar coordinates. An important lesson to be learned from the study of these
coordinate systems is the proper choice of a reference system for a given
problem. This choice is usually revealed by the manner in which the motion is generated or by the form in which the data are speciﬁed. Each of
the three coordinate systems will now be developed and illustrated.

2/4

Rectangular Coordinates (x-y)

This system of coordinates is particularly useful for describing motions where the x- and y-components of acceleration are independently
generated or determined. The resulting curvilinear motion is then obtained by a vector combination of the x- and y-components of the position vector, the velocity, and the acceleration.

Vector Representation
The particle path of Fig. 2/5 is shown again in Fig. 2/7 along with
x- and y-axes. The position vector r, the velocity v, and the acceleration
a of the particle as developed in Art. 2/3 are represented in Fig. 2/7 together with their x- and y-components. With the aid of the unit vectors
i and j, we can write the vectors r, v, and a in terms of their x- and
y-components. Thus,
r ϭ xi ϩ yj

v ϭ Ίvx2 ϩ vy2

a ϭ ax ϩ ay

2

tan ␪ ϭ

a ϭ Ίax ϩ ay
2

ay
a

vy
j

θ
A vx

ax

r

xi

As we differentiate with respect to time, we observe that the time derivatives of the unit vectors are zero because their magnitudes and directions remain constant. The scalar values of the components of v and a
x
y
v
x
v
y
are merely vx ϭ ˙, vy ϭ ˙ and ax ϭ ˙x ϭ ¨, ay ϭ ˙y ϭ ¨. (As drawn in
x
Fig. 2/7, ax is in the negative x-direction, so that ¨ would be a negative
number.)
As observed previously, the direction of the velocity is always tangent to the path, and from the ﬁgure it is clear that

2

v

(2/6)

a ϭ ˙ ϭ ¨ ϭ ¨i ϩ ¨j
v r x
y

2

y

yj

y
v ϭ ˙ ϭ ˙i ϩ ˙j
r x

v2 ϭ v x 2 ϩ v y 2

Path

vy
vx

2

If the angle ␪ is measured counterclockwise from the x-axis to v for the
configuration of axes shown, then we can also observe that dy/dx ϭ
tan ␪ ϭ vy/vx.

i

Figure 2/7

x

A

44

Chapter 2

Kinematics of Particles

If the coordinates x and y are known independently as functions of
time, x ϭ ƒ1(t) and y ϭ ƒ2(t), then for any value of the time we can comx
bine them to obtain r. Similarly, we combine their ﬁrst derivatives ˙
y
x
y
and ˙ to obtain v and their second derivatives ¨ and ¨ to obtain a. On
the other hand, if the acceleration components ax and ay are given as
functions of the time, we can integrate each one separately with respect to time, once to obtain vx and vy and again to obtain x ϭ ƒ1(t) and
y ϭ ƒ2(t). Elimination of the time t between these last two parametric
equations gives the equation of the curved path y ϭ ƒ(x).
From the foregoing discussion we can see that the rectangularcoordinate representation of curvilinear motion is merely the superposition of the components of two simultaneous rectilinear motions in the
x- and y-directions. Therefore, everything covered in Art. 2/2 on rectilinear motion can be applied separately to the x-motion and to the y-motion.

Projectile Motion
An important application of two-dimensional kinematic theory is
the problem of projectile motion. For a first treatment of the subject,
we neglect aerodynamic drag and the curvature and rotation of the
earth, and we assume that the altitude change is small enough so that
the acceleration due to gravity can be considered constant. With these
assumptions, rectangular coordinates are useful for the trajectory
analysis.
For the axes shown in Fig. 2/8, the acceleration components are
ax ϭ 0

ay ϭ Ϫg

Integration of these accelerations follows the results obtained previously in Art. 2/2a for constant acceleration and yields
vx ϭ (vx)0

vy ϭ (vy)0 Ϫ gt

x ϭ x0 ϩ (vx)0 t

y ϭ y0 ϩ (vy)0 t Ϫ 1 gt2
2

vy2 ϭ (vy)02 Ϫ 2g(y Ϫ y0)
In all these expressions, the subscript zero denotes initial conditions,
frequently taken as those at launch where, for the case illustrated,

y
vy

v
vx

vx

v0
(vy) 0 =
v0 sin θ

vy

g

θ

v

x

(vx ) 0 = v0 cos θ

Figure 2/8

Rectangular Coordinates (x-y)

Article 2/4

Andrew Davidhazy

x0 ϭ y0 ϭ 0. Note that the quantity g is taken to be positive throughout
this text.
We can see that the x- and y-motions are independent for the simple
projectile conditions under consideration. Elimination of the time t between the x- and y-displacement equations shows the path to be parabolic
(see Sample Problem 2/6). If we were to introduce a drag force which depends on the speed squared (for example), then the x- and y-motions would
be coupled (interdependent), and the trajectory would be nonparabolic.
When the projectile motion involves large velocities and high altitudes, to obtain accurate results we must account for the shape of the
projectile, the variation of g with altitude, the variation of the air density with altitude, and the rotation of the earth. These factors introduce
considerable complexity into the motion equations, and numerical integration of the acceleration equations is usually necessary.

This stroboscopic photograph of a bouncing ping-pong ball suggests not
only the parabolic nature of the path, but also the fact that the speed is
lower near the apex.

45

46

Chapter 2

Kinematics of Particles

SAMPLE PROBLEM 2/5
The curvilinear motion of a particle is defined by vx ϭ 50 Ϫ 16t and y ϭ
100 Ϫ 4t2, where vx is in meters per second, y is in meters, and t is in seconds.
It is also known that x ϭ 0 when t ϭ 0. Plot the path of the particle and determine its velocity and acceleration when the position y ϭ 0 is reached.
100

1

Solution.

The x-coordinate is obtained by integrating the expression for vx,
and the x-component of the acceleration is obtained by differentiating vx. Thus,

x

0

[ax ϭ ˙x]
v

͵ (50 Ϫ 16t) dt
t

dx ϭ

x ϭ 50t Ϫ

0

d
ax ϭ
(50 Ϫ 16t)
dt

8t2

m

2

80

y, m

΄͵ dx ϭ ͵ v dt΅ ͵

x

t=0

3

60
40

ax ϭ Ϫ16 m/s

2

20
0
0

The y-components of velocity and acceleration are
[vy ϭ ˙]
y

vy ϭ

d
(100 Ϫ 4t2)
dt

ay ϭ

d
(Ϫ8t)
dt

t=5s
40 A 60
x, m

20

80

vy ϭ Ϫ8t m/s

[ay ϭ ˙y]
v

4

ay ϭ Ϫ8 m/s2

Path

We now calculate corresponding values of x and y for various values of t and
plot x against y to obtain the path as shown.
When y ϭ 0, 0 ϭ 100 Ϫ 4t2, so t ϭ 5 s. For this value of the time, we have

vx = –30 m/s
–
A
θ = 53.1°

–

ax = –16 m/s 2

a = 17.89 m/s

vx ϭ 50 Ϫ 16(5) ϭ Ϫ30 m/s

Path

A

2

a y = –8 m/s 2

vy = –40 m/s

vy ϭ Ϫ8(5) ϭ Ϫ40 m/s

v = 50 m/s

v ϭ Ί(Ϫ30)2 ϩ (Ϫ40)2 ϭ 50 m/s
a ϭ Ί(Ϫ16)2 ϩ (Ϫ8)2 ϭ 17.89 m/s2

Helpful Hint

The velocity and acceleration components and their resultants are shown on the
separate diagrams for point A, where y ϭ 0. Thus, for this condition we may
write
v ϭ Ϫ30i Ϫ 40j m/s

Ans.

a ϭ Ϫ16i Ϫ 8j m/s2

Ans.

We observe that the velocity vector lies
along the tangent to the path as it
should, but that the acceleration vector
is not tangent to the path. Note especially that the acceleration vector has a
component that points toward the inside of the curved path. We concluded
from our diagram in Fig. 2/5 that it is
impossible for the acceleration to have a
component that points toward the outside of the curve.

Article 2/4

SAMPLE PROBLEM 2/6

y

A team of engineering students designs a medium-size catapult
which launches 8-lb steel spheres. The launch speed is v0 ϭ 80 ft/sec,
the launch angle is ␪ ϭ 35Њ above the horizontal, and the launch position is 6 ft above ground level. The students use an athletic ﬁeld with
an adjoining slope topped by an 8-ft fence as shown. Determine:

Rectangular Coordinates (x-y)

v0 = 80 ft/sec

47

fence
8′

θ = 35°

6′

20′
x
100′

30′

(a) the x-y coordinates of the point of ﬁrst impact
(b) the time duration tƒ of the ﬂight
(c) the maximum height h above the horizontal ﬁeld attained by the ball
(d) the velocity (expressed as a vector) with which the projectile strikes the
ground
Repeat part (a) for a launch speed of v0 ϭ 75 ft/sec.
Solution.

We make the assumptions of constant gravitational acceleration
ᕡ and no aerodynamic drag. With the latter assumption, the 8-lb weight of the projectile is irrelevant. Using the given x-y coordinate system, we begin by checking
the y-displacement at the horizontal position of the fence.
[x ϭ x0 ϩ (vx)0t]

100 ϩ 30 ϭ 0 ϩ (80 cos 35Њ)t

[y ϭ y0 ϩ (vy)0t Ϫ 1 gt2]
2

t ϭ 1.984 sec

y ϭ 6 ϩ 80 sin 35Њ(1.984) Ϫ 1 (32.2)(1.984)2 ϭ 33.7 ft
2

(a) Because the y-coordinate of the top of the fence is 20 ϩ 8 ϭ 28 feet, the
projectile clears the fence. We now ﬁnd the ﬂight time by setting y ϭ 20 ft:
1
[y ϭ y0 ϩ (vy)0t Ϫ 2 gt2]

[x ϭ x0 ϩ (vx)0t]

20 ϭ 6 ϩ 80 sin 35Њ(tƒ) Ϫ 1 (32.2)tƒ2
2

tƒ ϭ 2.50 s

Ans.

Helpful Hints

ᕡ Neglecting aerodynamic drag is a
poor assumption for projectiles with
relatively high initial velocities,
large sizes, and low weights. In a
vacuum, a baseball thrown with an
initial speed of 100 ft/sec at 45Њ
above the horizontal will travel about
311 feet over a horizontal range. In
sea-level air, the baseball range is
about 200 ft, while a typical beachball
under the same conditions will travel
about 10 ft.

x ϭ 0 ϩ 80 cos 35Њ(2.50) ϭ 164.0 ft

(b) Thus the point of ﬁrst impact is (x, y) ϭ (164.0, 20) ft.

Ans.

(c) For the maximum height:

ᕢ [vy2 ϭ (vy)02 Ϫ 2g(y Ϫ y0)] 02 ϭ (80 sin 35Њ)2 Ϫ 2(32.2)(h Ϫ 6) h ϭ 38.7 ft Ans.
(d) For the impact velocity:
[vx ϭ (vx)0]

vx ϭ 80 cos 35Њ ϭ 65.5 ft /sec

[vy ϭ (vy)0 Ϫ gt]

vy ϭ 80 sin 35Њ Ϫ 32.2(2.50) ϭ Ϫ34.7 ft /sec

So the impact velocity is v ϭ 65.5i Ϫ 34.7j ft/sec.

Ans.

If v0 ϭ 75 ft /sec, the time from launch to the fence is found by
[x ϭ x0 ϩ (vx)0t]

100 ϩ 30 ϭ (75 cos 35Њ)t

t ϭ 2.12 sec

and the corresponding value of y is
1

[y ϭ y0 ϩ (vy)0 t Ϫ 2 gt2]

y ϭ 6 ϩ 80 sin 35Њ(2.12) Ϫ 1 (32.2)(2.12)2 ϭ 24.9 ft
2

For this launch speed, we see that the projectile hits the fence, and the point
of impact is
(x, y) ϭ (130, 24.9) ft

Ans.

For lower launch speeds, the projectile could land on the slope or even on the
level portion of the athletic ﬁeld.

ᕢ As an alternative approach, we could

ﬁnd the time at apex where vy ϭ 0,
then use that time in the y-displacement
equation. Verify that the trajectory
apex occurs over the 100-ft horizontal portion of the athletic ﬁeld.

48

Chapter 2

Kinematics of Particles

PROBLEMS
(In the following problems where motion as a projectile in
air is involved, neglect air resistance unless otherwise
stated and use g ϭ 9.81 m/s2 or g ϭ 32.2 ft/sec2.)

Introductory Problems
2/59 At time t ϭ 0, the position vector of a particle moving in the x-y plane is r ϭ 5i m. By time t ϭ 0.02 s,
its position vector has become 5.1i ϩ 0.4j m. Determine the magnitude vav of its average velocity during
this interval and the angle ␪ made by the average
velocity with the positive x-axis.
2/60 A particle moving in the x-y plane has a velocity at
time t ϭ 6 s given by 4i ϩ 5j m/s, and at t ϭ 6.1 s its
velocity has become 4.3i ϩ 5.4j m/s. Calculate the
magnitude aav of its average acceleration during the
0.1-s interval and the angle ␪ it makes with the
x-axis.

2/65 A rocket runs out of fuel in the position shown and
continues in unpowered ﬂight above the atmosphere.
If its velocity in this position was 600 mi/hr, calculate the maximum additional altitude h acquired and
the corresponding time t to reach it. The gravitational acceleration during this phase of its ﬂight is
30.8 ft /sec2.
v = 600 mi/hr
Vertical

30°

Problem 2/65

2/61 The velocity of a particle moving in the x-y plane is
given by 6.12i ϩ 3.24j m/s at time t ϭ 3.65 s. Its average acceleration during the next 0.02 s is 4i ϩ 6j m/s2.
Determine the velocity v of the particle at t ϭ 3.67 s
and the angle ␪ between the average-acceleration
vector and the velocity vector at t ϭ 3.67 s.
2/62 A particle which moves with curvilinear motion has
coordinates in millimeters which vary with the time t
in seconds according to x ϭ 2t2 Ϫ 4t and y ϭ 3t2 Ϫ 1t3.
3
Determine the magnitudes of the velocity v and
acceleration a and the angles which these vectors
make with the x-axis when t ϭ 2 s.
2/63 The x-coordinate of a particle in curvilinear motion
is given by x ϭ 2t3 Ϫ 3t, where x is in feet and t is in
seconds. The y-component of acceleration in feet per
second squared is given by ay ϭ 4t. If the particle has
y-components y ϭ 0 and ˙ ϭ 4 ft/sec when t ϭ 0, ﬁnd
y
the magnitudes of the velocity v and acceleration a
when t ϭ 2 sec. Sketch the path for the ﬁrst
2 seconds of motion, and show the velocity and acceleration vectors for t ϭ 2 sec.

2/66 A particle moves in the x-y plane with a y-component
of velocity in feet per second given by vy ϭ 8t with t
in seconds. The acceleration of the particle in the
x-direction in feet per second squared is given by
ax ϭ 4t with t in seconds. When t ϭ 0, y ϭ 2 ft, x ϭ 0,
and vx ϭ 0. Find the equation of the path of the
particle and calculate the magnitude of the velocity
v of the particle for the instant when its x-coordinate
reaches 18 ft.
2/67 A roofer tosses a small tool to the ground. What minimum magnitude v0 of horizontal velocity is required
to just miss the roof corner B? Also determine the
distance d.
2.4 m
A
v0

1.2 m
0.9 m

B

2/64 The y-coordinate of a particle in curvilinear motion
is given by y ϭ 4t3 Ϫ 3t, where y is in inches and t is
in seconds. Also, the particle has an acceleration in
the x-direction given by ax ϭ 12t in. /sec2. If the velocity of the particle in the x-direction is 4 in./sec
when t ϭ 0, calculate the magnitudes of the velocity
v and acceleration a of the particle when t ϭ 1 sec.
Construct v and a in your solution.

3m

d

Problem 2/67

C

Article 2/4
2/68 Prove the well-known result that, for a given launch
speed v0, the launch angle ␪ ϭ 45Њ yields the maximum horizontal range R. Determine the maximum
range. (Note that this result does not hold when
aerodynamic drag is included in the analysis.)
2/69 Calculate the minimum possible magnitude u of the
muzzle velocity which a projectile must have when
ﬁred from point A to reach a target B on the same
horizontal plane 12 km away.

Problems

49

Representative Problems
2/71 The quarterback Q throws the football when the
receiver R is in the position shown. The receiver’s
velocity is constant at 10 yd/sec, and he catches
passes when the ball is 6 ft above the ground. If the
quarterback desires the receiver to catch the ball
2.5 sec after the launch instant shown, determine
the initial speed v0 and angle ␪ required.
v0
θ

u

7′

A

R

Q

B

vR

30 yd
12 km
Problem 2/71
Problem 2/69

2/70 The center of mass G of a high jumper follows the
trajectory shown. Determine the component v0, measured in the vertical plane of the ﬁgure, of his takeoff velocity and angle ␪ if the apex of the trajectory
just clears the bar at A. (In general, must the mass
center G of the jumper clear the bar during a successful jump?)

2/72 The water nozzle ejects water at a speed v0 ϭ 45
ft/sec at the angle ␪ ϭ 40Њ. Determine where, relative
to the wall base point B, the water lands. Neglect the
effects of the thickness of the wall.

v0
A

θ

3′
v0

3′
1′

3.5′

Problem 2/72

θ

G

3.5′

Problem 2/70

B

60′
Not to scale

A

2/73 Water is ejected from the water nozzle of Prob. 2/72
with a speed v0 ϭ 45 ft/sec. For what value of the
angle ␪ will the water land closest to the wall after
clearing the top? Neglect the effects of wall thickness and air resistance. Where does the water land?
2/74 A football player attempts a 30-yd ﬁeld goal. If he is
able to impart a velocity u of 100 ft/sec to the ball,
compute the minimum angle ␪ for which the ball will
clear the crossbar of the goal. (Hint: Let m ϭ tan ␪.)

u

10′

θ
30 yd
Problem 2/74

50

Chapter 2

Kinematics of Particles

2/75 The pilot of an airplane carrying a package of mail to
a remote outpost wishes to release the package at
the right moment to hit the recovery location A.
What angle ␪ with the horizontal should the pilot’s
line of sight to the target make at the instant of release? The airplane is ﬂying horizontally at an altitude of 100 m with a velocity of 200 km/h.

2/78 The basketball player likes to release his foul shots
with an initial speed v0 ϭ 23.5 ft /sec. What value(s)
of the initial angle ␪ will cause the ball to pass
through the center of the rim? Neglect clearance
considerations as the ball passes over the front portion of the rim.

200 km/h
v0

θ
θ

10′
100 m

7′

13′ 9′′

A
Problem 2/75

Problem 2/78

2/76 During a baseball practice session, the cutoff man A
executes a throw to the third baseman B. If the initial speed of the baseball is v0 ϭ 130 ft /sec, what
angle ␪ is best if the ball is to arrive at third base at
essentially ground level?

2/79 A projectile is launched with an initial speed of 200
m/s at an angle of 60Њ with respect to the horizontal.
Compute the range R as measured up the incline.

B
v0
7′

θ

A

B

200 m/s
60°
R

20°

A
150′
Problem 2/76

Problem 2/79

2/77 If the tennis player serves the ball horizontally
(␪ ϭ 0), calculate its velocity v if the center of the
ball clears the 36-in. net by 6 in. Also ﬁnd the distance s from the net to the point where the ball hits
the court surface. Neglect air resistance and the
effect of ball spin.

2/80 A rock is thrown horizontally from a tower at A and
hits the ground 3.5 s later at B. The line of sight
from A to B makes an angle of 50Њ with the horizontal. Compute the magnitude of the initial velocity u
of the rock.

θ

A

u
50°

A

v
8.5′
36″
s

39′
Problem 2/77
B

Problem 2/80

Article 2/4
2/81 The muzzle velocity of a long-range riﬂe at A is u ϭ
400 m /s. Determine the two angles of elevation ␪
which will permit the projectile to hit the mountain
target B.

Problems

51

2/84 A team of engineering students is designing a catapult to launch a small ball at A so that it lands in the
box. If it is known that the initial velocity vector
makes a 30Њ angle with the horizontal, determine the
range of launch speeds v0 for which the ball will land
inside the box.

v0
A

30°

12″

8″

B
12′
u

θ2 u

A

1.5 km

2′

Problem 2/84

θ1

2/85 Ball bearings leave the horizontal trough with a velocity of magnitude u and fall through the 70-mmdiameter hole as shown. Calculate the permissible
range of u which will enable the balls to enter the
hole. Take the dashed positions to represent the limiting conditions.

5 km

Problem 2/81

2/82 A projectile is launched with a speed v0 ϭ 25 m /s
from the ﬂoor of a 5-m-high tunnel as shown. Determine the maximum horizontal range R of the projectile and the corresponding launch angle ␪.

120 mm

20 mm

u

80 mm
v0 = 25 m/s

5m
θ

A
70 mm

Problem 2/82

2/83 A projectile is launched from point A with the initial
conditions shown in the ﬁgure. Determine the slant
distance s which locates the point B of impact. Calculate the time of ﬂight t.
v0 = 120 m/s
B
A

s

θ = 40°

20°

Problem 2/85

2/86 A horseshoe player releases the horseshoe at A with
an initial speed v0 ϭ 36 ft/sec. Determine the range
for the launch angle ␪ for which the shoe will strike
the 14-in. vertical stake.
v0 = 36 ft/sec
A

θ
3

14″
B

800 m
40′
Problem 2/83
Problem 2/86

52

Chapter 2

Kinematics of Particles

2/87 A ﬁreworks shell is launched vertically from point A
with speed sufﬁcient to reach a maximum altitude of
500 ft. A steady horizontal wind causes a constant
horizontal acceleration of 0.5 ft/sec2, but does not affect the vertical motion. Determine the deviation ␦
at the top of the trajectory caused by the wind.
δ

2/90 The pilot of an airplane pulls into a steep 45° climb
at 300 km/h and releases a package at position A.
Calculate the horizontal distance s and the time t
from the point of release to the point at which the
package strikes the ground.

45°

300 km/h
A

500 m
Wind
500′
v0
s
A

Problem 2/90

Problem 2/87

2/88 Consider the ﬁreworks shell of the previous problem.
What angle ␣ compensates for the wind in that the
shell peaks directly over the launch point A? All
other information remains as stated in the previous
problem, including the fact that the initial launch
velocity v0 if vertical would result in a maximum
altitude of 500 ft. What is the maximum height h
possible in this problem?

2/91 Compare the slant range Ri and ﬂight time ti for the
depicted projectile with the range R and ﬂight time t
for a projectile (launched with speed v0 and inclination angle ␣) which ﬂies over a horizontal surface.
Evaluate your four results for ␣ ϭ 30Њ.
B
v0

α

A

Wind

α

Ri

Problem 2/91
h
v0

2/92 A projectile is launched from point A and lands on
the same level at D. Its maximum altitude is h. Determine and plot the fraction ƒ2 of the total ﬂight
time that the projectile is above the level ƒ1h, where
ƒ1 is a fraction which can vary from zero to 1. State
the value of ƒ2 for ƒ1 ϭ 3.
4

α

A

Problem 2/88

2/89 Determine the location h of the spot toward which the
pitcher must throw if the ball is to hit the catcher’s
mitt. The ball is released with a speed of 40 m/s.

B

C
ƒ1h

20 m

θ
2.2 m

v0

α

v0
h

A

D
Problem 2/92

0.6 m

1m
Problem 2/89

h

Article 2/4
᭤ 2/93 A projectile is ejected into an experimental ﬂuid at
time t ϭ 0. The initial speed is v0 and the angle to
the horizontal is ␪. The drag on the projectile results
in an acceleration term aD ϭ Ϫkv, where k is a constant and v is the velocity of the projectile. Determine the x- and y-components of both the velocity
and displacement as functions of time. What is the
terminal velocity? Include the effects of gravitational
acceleration.

Problems

53

᭤ 2/95 A projectile is launched with speed v0 from point A.
Determine the launch angle ␪ which results in the
maximum range R up the incline of angle ␣ (where
0 Յ ␣ Յ 90Њ). Evaluate your results for ␣ ϭ 0, 30Њ,
and 45Њ.

B
v0

y

θ

α

A

R

v0
Problem 2/95

θ

x

᭤ 2/96 A projectile is launched from point A with the initial
conditions shown in the ﬁgure. Determine the x- and
y-coordinates of the point of impact.

Problem 2/93

᭤ 2/94 An experimental ﬁreworks shell is launched vertically from point A with an initial velocity of magnitude v0 ϭ 100 ft /sec. In addition to the acceleration
due to gravity, an internal thrusting mechanism
causes a constant acceleration component of 2g in
the 60Њ direction shown for the ﬁrst 2 seconds of
ﬂight, after which the thruster ceases to function.
Determine the maximum height h achieved, the
total ﬂight time, the net horizontal displacement
from point A, and plot the entire trajectory. Neglect
any acceleration due to aerodynamics.

2g
60°

v0

A

Problem 2/94

C

500′

y
v0 = 225 ft/sec
A

B

30°

1000′
Problem 2/96

x

54

Chapter 2

Kinematics of Particles

2/5

A

n
t

As we mentioned in Art. 2/1, one of the common descriptions of
curvilinear motion uses path variables, which are measurements made
along the tangent t and normal n to the path of the particle. These coordinates provide a very natural description for curvilinear motion and
are frequently the most direct and convenient coordinates to use. The
n- and t-coordinates are considered to move along the path with the particle, as seen in Fig. 2/9 where the particle advances from A to B to C.
The positive direction for n at any position is always taken toward the
center of curvature of the path. As seen from Fig. 2/9, the positive
n-direction will shift from one side of the curve to the other side if the
curvature changes direction.

t

C

n

n
t

B

Figure 2/9

Velocity and Acceleration
We now use the coordinates n and t to describe the velocity v and
acceleration a which were introduced in Art. 2/3 for the curvilinear motion of a particle. For this purpose, we introduce unit vectors en in the
n-direction and et in the t-direction, as shown in Fig. 2/10a for the position of the particle at point A on its path. During a differential increment of time dt, the particle moves a differential distance ds along the
curve from A to AЈ. With the radius of curvature of the path at this position designated by ␳, we see that ds ϭ ␳ d␤, where ␤ is in radians. It is
unnecessary to consider the differential change in ␳ between A and AЈ
because a higher-order term would be introduced which disappears in
the limit. Thus, the magnitude of the velocity can be written v ϭ ds/dt ϭ
␳ d␤/dt, and we can write the velocity as the vector

e′t

Path

t
v′
et
C

ρ

v
A′

dβ

n
en

ds = ρ dβ
A

˙
v ϭ vet ϭ ␳␤ et

(a)

a
at

dv
de t

v′

dvt

an

e′
t
et

Normal and Tangential Coordinates (n-t )

dvn
v

dβ
dβ
(b)

(c)

Figure 2/10

(2/7)

The acceleration a of the particle was defined in Art. 2/3 as a ϭ
dv/dt, and we observed from Fig. 2/5 that the acceleration is a vector
which reflects both the change in magnitude and the change in direction of v. We now differentiate v in Eq. 2/7 by applying the ordinary
rule for the differentiation of the product of a scalar and a vector*
and get
aϭ

dv d(vet)
ϭ
ϭ vet ϩ ˙et
˙ v
dt
dt

(2/8)

where the unit vector et now has a nonzero derivative because its direction changes.
e
To ﬁnd ˙t we analyze the change in et during a differential increment of motion as the particle moves from A to AЈ in Fig. 2/10a. The
unit vector et correspondingly changes to eЈ, and the vector difference
t
det is shown in part b of the ﬁgure. The vector det in the limit has a
magnitude equal to the length of the arc ͉et͉ d␤ ϭ d␤ obtained by
swinging the unit vector et through the angle d␤ expressed in radians.

*See Art. C/7 of Appendix C.

Article 2/5

Normal and Tangential Coordinates (n-t )

The direction of det is given by en. Thus, we can write det ϭ en d␤.
Dividing by d␤ gives
det
ϭ en
d␤
Dividing by dt gives det/dt ϭ (d␤/dt)en, which can be written

˙
e
˙t ϭ ␤ en

(2/9)

˙
˙
With the substitution of Eq. 2/9 and ␤ from the relation v ϭ ␳␤ , Eq.
2/8 for the acceleration becomes
aϭ

where

v2
v
e ϩ ˙et
␳ n

(2/10)

v2
˙
˙
an ϭ ␳ ϭ ␳␤ 2 ϭ v␤
v
s
at ϭ ˙ ϭ ¨
a ϭ Ίan2 ϩ at2

v
We stress that at ϭ ˙ is the time rate of change of the speed v. Finally,
˙
¨ ␳˙
v
we note that at ϭ ˙ ϭ d(␳␤ )/dt ϭ ␳␤ ϩ ˙ ␤ . This relation, however, ﬁnds
␳
little use because we seldom have reason to compute ˙.

Geometric Interpretation
Full understanding of Eq. 2/10 comes only when we clearly see the
geometry of the physical changes it describes. Figure 2/10c shows the velocity vector v when the particle is at A and v؅ when it is at AЈ. The vector
change in the velocity is dv, which establishes the direction of the acceleration a. The n-component of dv is labeled dvn, and in the limit its magnitude equals the length of the arc generated by swinging the vector v as a
radius through the angle d␤. Thus, ͉dvn͉ ϭ v d␤ and the n-component of
˙
acceleration is an ϭ ͉dvn͉/dt ϭ v(d␤/dt) ϭ v␤ as before. The t-component of
dv is labeled dvt, and its magnitude is simply the change dv in the magnitude or length of the velocity vector. Therefore, the t-component of accels
v
eration is at ϭ dv/dt ϭ ˙ ϭ ¨ as before. The acceleration vectors resulting
from the corresponding vector changes in velocity are shown in Fig. 2/10c.
It is especially important to observe that the normal component of
acceleration an is always directed toward the center of curvature C. The
tangential component of acceleration, on the other hand, will be in the
positive t-direction of motion if the speed v is increasing and in the negative t-direction if the speed is decreasing. In Fig. 2/11 are shown
schematic representations of the variation in the acceleration vector for
a particle moving from A to B with (a) increasing speed and (b) decreasing speed. At an inﬂection point on the curve, the normal acceleration
v2/␳ goes to zero because ␳ becomes inﬁnite.

55

Chapter 2

Kinematics of Particles
B

A

B

A

Speed
increasing
(a)

Speed
decreasing
(b)

Acceleration vectors for
particle moving from A to B

Figure 2/11
t
v
at
P

r

an

n
O

θ

Circular Motion
Circular motion is an important special case of plane curvilinear
motion where the radius of curvature ␳ becomes the constant radius r of
the circle and the angle ␤ is replaced by the angle ␪ measured from any
convenient radial reference to OP, Fig. 2/12. The velocity and the acceleration components for the circular motion of the particle P become

˙
v ϭ r␪
˙
˙
an ϭ v2/r ϭ r ␪ 2 ϭ v ␪

(2/11)

¨
at ϭ ˙ ϭ r ␪
v
Figure 2/12

We ﬁnd repeated use for Eqs. 2/10 and 2/11 in dynamics, so these
relations and the principles behind them should be mastered.

GaryTramontina/Bloomberg viaGetty Images

56

An example of uniform circular motion is this car moving with constant speed
around a wet skidpad (a circular roadway with a diameter of about 200 feet).

Article 2/5

Normal and Tangential Coordinates (n-t )

57

60 m

C

SAMPLE PROBLEM 2/7
To anticipate the dip and hump in the road, the driver of a car applies her
brakes to produce a uniform deceleration. Her speed is 100 km/h at the bottom A of
the dip and 50 km/h at the top C of the hump, which is 120 m along the road from
A. If the passengers experience a total acceleration of 3 m/s2 at A and if the radius of
curvature of the hump at C is 150 m, calculate (a) the radius of curvature ␳ at A, (b)
the acceleration at the inﬂection point B, and (c) the total acceleration at C.

Solution.

The dimensions of the car are small compared with those of the

ᕡ path, so we will treat the car as a particle. The velocities are

΂

vA ϭ 100
vC ϭ 50

km
h

60 m

B

A

150 m

Helpful Hint

ᕡ Actually, the radius of curvature to
the road differs by about 1 m from
that to the path followed by the center of mass of the passengers, but we
have neglected this relatively small
difference.

m
1h
΃΂3600 s΃΂1000 km΃ ϭ 27.8 m/s

1000
ϭ 13.89 m/s
3600

We ﬁnd the constant deceleration along the path from

΄͵ v dv ϭ ͵ a ds΅

͵

t

vC

vA

͵ ds
s

v dv ϭ at

+n

0

a = 3 m/s2

at ϭ

an = 1.785 m/s2

(13.89)2 Ϫ (27.8)2
1
(v 2 Ϫ vA2) ϭ
ϭ Ϫ2.41 m/s2
2s C
2(120)

A
a t = –2.41

+t

m/s 2

(a) Condition at A. With the total acceleration given and at determined, we
can easily compute an and hence ␳ from
[a2 ϭ an2 ϩ at2]
[an ϭ v2/␳]

an2 ϭ 32 Ϫ (2.41)2 ϭ 3.19

an ϭ 1.785 m/s2

␳ ϭ v2/an ϭ (27.8)2/1.785 ϭ 432 m

(b) Condition at B.

B

Ans.

a = a t = –2.41 m/s 2

Since the radius of curvature is inﬁnite at the inﬂection
a t = –2.41 m/s2 C

point, an ϭ 0 and
a ϭ at ϭ Ϫ2.41 m/s2

Ans.
an = 2.73 m/s2

(c) Condition at C.
[an ϭ v2/␳]

an ϭ (13.89)2/150 ϭ 1.286 m/s2

a ϭ 1.286en Ϫ 2.41et m/s2
where the magnitude of a is
a ϭ Ί(1.286)2 ϩ (Ϫ2.41)2 ϭ 2.73 m/s2

Ans.

The acceleration vectors representing the conditions at each of the three
points are shown for clariﬁcation.

+t

an = 1.286 m/s 2
+n

The normal acceleration becomes

With unit vectors en and et in the n- and t-directions, the acceleration may be
written

[a ϭ Ίan2 ϩ at2]

+t

58

Chapter 2

Kinematics of Particles

SAMPLE PROBLEM 2/8
A certain rocket maintains a horizontal attitude of its axis during the powered phase of its ﬂight at high altitude. The thrust imparts a horizontal component of acceleration of 20 ft/sec2, and the downward acceleration component is
the acceleration due to gravity at that altitude, which is g ϭ 30 ft/sec2. At the instant represented, the velocity of the mass center G of the rocket along the 15Њ
direction of its trajectory is 12,000 mi/hr. For this position determine (a) the radius of curvature of the ﬂight trajectory, (b) the rate at which the speed v is in˙
creasing, (c) the angular rate ␤ of the radial line from G to the center of
curvature C, and (d) the vector expression for the total acceleration a of the
rocket.

G
Horiz.

20 ft /sec 2
15° v = 12,000 mi/hr
t

n
g = 30

ft /sec 2

ρ

C

Solution.

We observe that the radius of curvature appears in the expression
for the normal component of acceleration, so we use n- and t-coordinates to describe the motion of G. The n- and t-components of the total acceleration are obᕡ tained by resolving the given horizontal and vertical accelerations into their nand t-components and then combining. From the ﬁgure we get

Helpful Hints

ᕡ Alternatively, we could ﬁnd the resultant acceleration and then resolve it into n- and t-components.

an ϭ 30 cos 15Њ Ϫ 20 sin 15Њ ϭ 23.8 ft/sec2
at ϭ 30 sin 15Њ ϩ 20 cos 15Њ ϭ 27.1 ft/sec2

(a) We may now compute the radius of curvature from
2

ᕢ [an ϭ v2/␳]

v2 [(12,000)(44/30)]
ϭ 13.01(106) ft
␳ϭa ϭ
23.8
n

Ans.

ᕢ To convert from mi/hr to ft/sec, multi44 ft/sec
5280 ft/mi
ϭ
which
3600 sec/hr
30 mi/hr
is easily remembered, as 30 mi/hr is
the same as 44 ft/sec.
ply by

(b) The rate at which v is increasing is simply the t-component of acceleration.
[v ϭ at]
˙

v
˙ ϭ 27.1 ft/sec2

Ans.

˙
(c) The angular rate ␤ of line GC depends on v and ␳ and is given by
˙
[v ϭ ␳␤ ]

˙
␤ ϭ v/␳ ϭ

12,000(44/30)
13.01(106)

ϭ 13.53(10Ϫ4) rad/sec

t

(d) With unit vectors en and et for the n- and t-directions, respectively, the total
acceleration becomes
a ϭ 23.8en ϩ 27.1et

ax = 20 ft /sec 2
x
·
15° a = v

Ans.

ft/sec2

Ans.

et

v2
–
an = —
ρ
en
g = 30 ft /sec 2

a

Article 2/5

PROBLEMS
Introductory Problems
2/97 Determine the maximum speed for each car if the
normal acceleration is limited to 0.88g. The roadway
is unbanked and level.

Problems

59

2/100 The driver of the truck has an acceleration of 0.4g
as the truck passes over the top A of the hump in
the road at constant speed. The radius of curvature
of the road at the top of the hump is 98 m, and the
center of mass G of the driver (considered a particle) is 2 m above the road. Calculate the speed v of
the truck.
G

A

2m
21 m
Problem 2/100

16 m
A

B

2/101 A bicycle is placed on a service rack with its wheels
hanging free. As part of a bearing test, the front
wheel is spun at the rate N ϭ 45 rev /min. Assume
that this rate is constant and determine the speed v
and magnitude a of the acceleration of point A.

N

Problem 2/97

2/98 A car is traveling around a circular track of 800-ft
radius. If the magnitude of its total acceleration is
10 ft/sec2 at the instant when its speed is 45 mi/hr,
determine the rate at which the car is changing its
speed.
2/99 Six acceleration vectors are shown for the car whose
velocity vector is directed forward. For each acceleration vector describe in words the instantaneous motion of the car.
a4

a3
a2

a5

a1

a6
Problem 2/99

v

O

27″

30°
A

Problem 2/101

2/102 A ship which moves at a steady 20-knot speed
(1 knot ϭ 1.852 km /h) executes a turn to port by
changing its compass heading at a constant counterclockwise rate. If it requires 60 s to alter course
90Њ, calculate the magnitude of the acceleration a
of the ship during the turn.
2/103 A train enters a curved horizontal section of track
at a speed of 100 km/h and slows down with constant deceleration to 50 km/h in 12 seconds. An accelerometer mounted inside the train records a
horizontal acceleration of 2 m/s2 when the train is
6 seconds into the curve. Calculate the radius of
curvature ␳ of the track for this instant.

60

Chapter 2

Kinematics of Particles

2/104 The two cars A and B enter an unbanked and level
turn. They cross line C-C simultaneously, and each
car has the speed corresponding to a maximum
normal acceleration of 0.9g in the turn. Determine
the elapsed time for each car between its two crossings of line C-C. What is the relative position of the
two cars as the second car exits the turn? Assume
no speed changes throughout.

2/106 A particle moves along the curved path shown. If
the particle has a speed of 40 ft/sec at A at time tA
and a speed of 44 ft/sec at B at time tB, determine
the average values of the acceleration of the particle between A and B, both normal and tangent to
the path.

B

C

26°

tB = 3.84 sec

b
a

36°

A
88 m

tA = 3.64 sec

72 m
Problem 2/106

b

A
B

a

C
Problem 2/104

2/105 Revisit the two cars of the previous problem, only
now the track has variable banking—a concept
shown in the ﬁgure. Car A is on the unbanked portion of the track and its normal acceleration remains at 0.9g. Car B is on the banked portion of
the track and its normal acceleration is limited to
1.12g. If the cars approach line C-C with speeds
equal to the respective maxima in the turn, determine the time for each car to negotiate the turn as
delimited by line C-C. What is the relative position
of the two cars as the second car exits the turn?
Assume no speed changes throughout.
B

A

θ

Problem 2/105

2/107 The speed of a car increases uniformly with time
from 50 km/h at A to 100 km/h at B during 10 seconds. The radius of curvature of the hump at A is
40 m. If the magnitude of the total acceleration of
the mass center of the car is the same at B as at A,
compute the radius of curvature ␳B of the dip in the
road at B. The mass center of the car is 0.6 m from
the road.

A

0.6 m

ρB

40 m
B
Problem 2/107

Article 2/5

Representative Problems
2/108 The ﬁgure shows two possible paths for negotiating
an unbanked turn on a horizontal portion of a race
course. Path A-A follows the centerline of the road
and has a radius of curvature ␳A ϭ 85 m, while
path B-B uses the width of the road to good advantage in increasing the radius of curvature to
␳B ϭ 200 m. If the drivers limit their speeds in
their curves so that the lateral acceleration does
not exceed 0.8g, determine the maximum speed for
each path.
A B

ρB =

200

m
ρA =

Problems

61

2/110 A satellite travels with constant speed v in a circular orbit 320 km above the earth’s surface. Calculate v knowing that the acceleration of the satellite
is the gravitational acceleration at its altitude.
(Note: Review Art. 1/5 as necessary and use the
mean value of g and the mean value of the earth’s
radius. Also recognize that v is the magnitude of
the velocity of the satellite with respect to the center of the earth.)
2/111 The car is traveling at a speed of 60 mi/hr as it approaches point A. Beginning at A, the car decelerates at a constant 7 ft/sec2 until it gets to point B,
after which its constant rate of decrease of speed is
3 ft/sec2 as it rounds the interchange ramp. Determine the magnitude of the total car acceleration
(a) just before it gets to B, (b) just after it passes B,
and (c) at point C.

85 m

200′
C
A B
Problem 2/108
A

2/109 Consider the polar axis of the earth to be fixed in
space and compute the magnitudes of the velocity
and acceleration of a point P on the earth’s surface at latitude 40° north. The mean diameter of
the earth is 12 742 km and its angular velocity is
0.7292(10Ϫ4) rad/s.
N

B

300′
Problem 2/111

2/112 Write the vector expression for the acceleration a
of the mass center G of the simple pendulum in
both n-t and x-y coordinates for the instant when
˙
¨
␪ ϭ 60Њ if ␪ ϭ 2 rad/sec and ␪ ϭ 4.025 rad/sec2.
P

x

θ

40°

4′
y
n
S
Problem 2/109

G
t
Problem 2/112

62

Chapter 2

Kinematics of Particles

2/113 The preliminary design for a “small” space station
to orbit the earth in a circular path consists of a
ring (torus) with a circular cross section as shown.
The living space within the torus is shown in section A, where the “ground level” is 20 ft from the
center of the section. Calculate the angular speed N
in revolutions per minute required to simulate
standard gravity at the surface of the earth
(32.17 ft /sec2). Recall that you would be unaware of
a gravitational ﬁeld if you were in a nonrotating
spacecraft in a circular orbit around the earth.

2/115 The car C increases its speed at the constant rate of
1.5 m/s2 as it rounds the curve shown. If the magnitude of the total acceleration of the car is
2.5 m/s2 at the point A where the radius of curvature is 200 m, compute the speed v of the car at this
point.

C

A

N
Problem 2/115
0′
24

2/116 A football player releases a ball with the initial conditions shown in the ﬁgure. Determine the radius
of curvature of the trajectory (a) just after release
and (b) at the apex. For each case, compute the
time rate of change of the speed.

r

v0 = 80 ft/sec
A
θ = 35°

r
"Ground level"

′
20

Section A
Problem 2/113

2/114 Magnetic tape is being transferred from reel A to
reel B and passes around idler pulleys C and D. At
a certain instant, point P1 on the tape is in contact
with pulley C and point P2 is in contact with pulley
D. If the normal component of acceleration of P1 is
40 m/s2 and the tangential component of acceleration of P2 is 30 m /s2 at this instant, compute the
corresponding speed v of the tape, the magnitude of
the total acceleration of P1, and the magnitude of
the total acceleration of P2.
P2
C

50 mm

D

P1
100 mm
A

B
Problem 2/114

Problem 2/116

2/117 For the football of the previous problem, determine
the radius of curvature ␳ of the path and the time
rate of change ˙ of the speed at times t ϭ 1 sec and
v
t ϭ 2 sec, where t ϭ 0 is the time of release from
the quarterback’s hand.
2/118 A particle moving in the x-y plane has a position
vector given by r ϭ 3t2i ϩ 2t 3j, where r is in inches
2
3
and t is in seconds. Calculate the radius of curvature ␳ of the path for the position of the particle
when t ϭ 2 sec. Sketch the velocity v and the curvature of the path for this particular instant.

Article 2/5
2/119 The design of a camshaft-drive system of a fourcylinder automobile engine is shown. As the engine
is revved up, the belt speed v changes uniformly
from 3 m/s to 6 m/s over a two-second interval. Calculate the magnitudes of the accelerations of points
P1 and P2 halfway through this time interval.
60 mm
P1

Camshaft
sprocket

P2

Problems

63

2/121 At a certain point in the reentry of the space shuttle into the earth’s atmosphere, the total acceleration of the shuttle may be represented by two
components. One component is the gravitational
acceleration g ϭ 9.66 m /s2 at this altitude. The second component equals 12.90 m/s2 due to atmospheric resistance and is directed opposite to the
velocity. The shuttle is at an altitude of 48.2 km
and has reduced its orbital velocity of 28 300 km/h
to 15 450 km/h in the direction ␪ ϭ 1.50Њ. For this
instant, calculate the radius of curvature ␳ of the
path and the rate ˙ at which the speed is changing.
v

Drive belt
tensioner
v

Intermediate
sprocket

Crankshaft
sprocket

θ

v
Problem 2/119

2/120 A small particle P starts from point O with a negligible speed and increases its speed to a value
v ϭ Ί2gy, where y is the vertical drop from O.
When x ϭ 50 ft, determine the n-component of acceleration of the particle. (See Art. C/10 for the radius of curvature.)
O

Horizontal

x

P
v
Vertical

y=

x

2

( ––)
20

Problem 2/121

2/122 The particle P starts from rest at point A at time
t ϭ 0 and changes its speed thereafter at a constant rate of 2g as it follows the horizontal path
shown. Determine the magnitude and direction
of its total acceleration (a) just before point B,
(b) just after point B, and (c) as it passes point C.
State your directions relative to the x-axis shown
(CCW positive).

ft
A

P

B

3m
y

3.5 m
Problem 2/120
C

x

Problem 2/122

64

Chapter 2

Kinematics of Particles

2/123 For the conditions of the previous problem, determine the magnitude and direction of the total acceleration of the particle P at times t ϭ 0.8 s and
t ϭ 1.2 s.
2/124 Race car A follows path a-a while race car B follows
path b-b on the unbanked track. If each car has a
constant speed limited to that corresponding to a
lateral (normal) acceleration of 0.8g, determine the
times tA and tB for both cars to negotiate the turn
as delimited by the line C-C.

2/126 An earth satellite which moves in the elliptical
equatorial orbit shown has a velocity v in space of
17 970 km/h when it passes the end of the semiminor axis at A. The earth has an absolute surface
value of g of 9.821 m/s2 and has a radius of 6371 km.
Determine the radius of curvature ␳ of the orbit at A.
16 000 km
A

v

r

13 860 km
C
a
b
88 m
72 m

8000
km
Problem 2/126
b
B
a

2/127 A particle which moves in two-dimensional curvilinear motion has coordinates in millimeters which
vary with time t in seconds according to x ϭ 5t2 ϩ 4
and y ϭ 2t3 ϩ 6. For time t ϭ 3 s, determine the radius of curvature of the particle path and the magnitudes of the normal and tangential accelerations.

A
C
Problem 2/124

2/125 The mine skip is being hauled to the surface over
the curved track by the cable wound around the
30-in. drum, which turns at the constant clockwise
speed of 120 rev/min. The shape of the track is designed so that y ϭ x2 /40, where x and y are in feet.
Calculate the magnitude of the total acceleration of
the skip as it reaches a level of 2 ft below the top.
Neglect the dimensions of the skip compared with
those of the path. Recall that the radius of curvature is given by
2 3/2

Sinusoidal
3m
3m

Problem 2/128

d2y

dx2

x
30″
y
Problem 2/125

L

v

΄1 ϩ ΂dx΃ ΅
␳ϭ
dy

᭤ 2/128 In a handling test, a car is driven through the
slalom course shown. It is assumed that the car
path is sinusoidal and that the maximum lateral
acceleration is 0.7g. If the testers wish to design a
slalom through which the maximum speed is
80 km/h, what cone spacing L should be used?

Article 2/5
᭤ 2/129 The pin P is constrained to move in the slotted
guides which move at right angles to one another.
At the instant represented, A has a velocity to the
right of 0.2 m/s which is decreasing at the rate of
0.75 m/s each second. At the same time, B is moving down with a velocity of 0.15 m/s which is decreasing at the rate of 0.5 m/s each second. For this
instant determine the radius of curvature ␳ of the
path followed by P. Is it possible to also determine
the time rate of change of ␳?

B

P

A

Problem 2/129

Problems

65

᭤2/130 A particle which moves with curvilinear motion has
coordinates in meters which vary with time t in seconds according to x ϭ 2t2 ϩ 3t Ϫ 1 and y ϭ 5t Ϫ 2.
Determine the coordinates of the center of curvature C at time t ϭ 1 s.

66

Chapter 2

Kinematics of Particles

2/6

y

We now consider the third description of plane curvilinear motion,
namely, polar coordinates where the particle is located by the radial distance r from a ﬁxed point and by an angular measurement ␪ to the radial line. Polar coordinates are particularly useful when a motion is
constrained through the control of a radial distance and an angular position or when an unconstrained motion is observed by measurements of
a radial distance and an angular position.
Figure 2/13a shows the polar coordinates r and ␪ which locate a
particle traveling on a curved path. An arbitrary fixed line, such as the
x-axis, is used as a reference for the measurement of ␪. Unit vectors er
r and e␪ are established in the positive r- and ␪-directions, respectively.
The position vector r to the particle at A has a magnitude equal to the
radial distance r and a direction specified by the unit vector er. Thus,
we express the location of the particle at A by the vector

Path

θ

eθ
er
A
r
θ

r ϭ rer

x

O
(a)
deθ
–r
e′
θ

Polar Coordinates (r-␪)

+θ
eθ

der

e′
r
er

dθ
dθ
(b)

Figure 2/13

Time Derivatives of the Unit Vectors
r
To differentiate this relation with respect to time to obtain v ϭ ˙ and
v
a ϭ ˙, we need expressions for the time derivatives of both unit vectors er
and e␪. We obtain ˙r and ˙␪ in exactly the same way we derived ˙t in the
e
e
e
preceding article. During time dt the coordinate directions rotate through
the angle d␪, and the unit vectors also rotate through the same angle
from er and e␪ to eЈ and eЈ, as shown in Fig. 2/13b. We note that the vecr
␪
tor change der is in the plus ␪-direction and that de␪ is in the minus
r-direction. Because their magnitudes in the limit are equal to the unit
vector as radius times the angle d␪ in radians, we can write them as
der ϭ e␪ d␪ and de␪ ϭ Ϫer d␪. If we divide these equations by d␪, we have
der
ϭ e␪
d␪

and

de␪
ϭ Ϫer
d␪

If, on the other hand, we divide them by dt, we have der/dt ϭ (d␪/dt)e␪
and de␪/dt ϭ Ϫ(d␪/dt)er, or simply

˙
e
˙r ϭ ␪ e␪

and

˙
e
˙␪ ϭ Ϫ ␪ er

(2/12)

Velocity
We are now ready to differentiate r ϭ rer with respect to time. Using
the rule for differentiating the product of a scalar and a vector gives
v ϭ ˙ ϭ ˙er ϩ rer
r
r
˙
With the substitution of ˙r from Eq. 2/12, the vector expression for the
e
velocity becomes

˙
v ϭ ˙er ϩ r ␪ e␪
r

(2/13)

Article 2/6

where

Polar Coordinates (r- ␪)

67

vr ϭ ˙
r

˙
v␪ ϭ r ␪
v ϭ Ίvr2 ϩ v␪2
The r-component of v is merely the rate at which the vector r
stretches. The ␪-component of v is due to the rotation of r.

Acceleration
We now differentiate the expression for v to obtain the acceleration
˙
v
a ϭ ˙. Note that the derivative of r ␪ e␪ will produce three terms, since
all three factors are variable. Thus,

¨
˙e
a ϭ ˙ ϭ (r er ϩ ˙˙r) ϩ (r ␪ e␪ ϩ r ␪ e␪ ϩ r ␪ ˙␪)
v
re
¨
˙˙
e
e
Substitution of ˙r and ˙␪ from Eq. 2/12 and collecting terms give

˙
¨
a ϭ (r Ϫ r ␪ 2)er ϩ (r ␪ ϩ 2r ␪ )e␪
¨
˙˙
where

(2/14)

˙
r
ar ϭ ¨ Ϫ r ␪ 2
¨
a␪ ϭ r ␪ ϩ 2r ␪
˙˙
a ϭ Ίar2 ϩ a␪2

Path
v′

We can write the ␪-component alternatively as
a␪ ϭ

1 d 2˙
(r ␪ )
r dt

vθ′
A′

which can be veriﬁed easily by carrying out the differentiation. This
form for a␪ will be useful when we treat the angular momentum of particles in the next chapter.

Geometric Interpretation
The terms in Eq. 2/14 can be best understood when the geometry of
the physical changes can be clearly seen. For this purpose, Fig. 2/14a is
developed to show the velocity vectors and their r- and ␪-components at
position A and at position AЈ after an inﬁnitesimal movement. Each of
these components undergoes a change in magnitude and direction as
v′
shown in Fig. 2/14b. In this ﬁgure we see the following changes:
θ
(a) Magnitude Change of vr . This change is simply the increase in rθ· dθ
length of vr or dvr ϭ dr , and the corresponding acceleration term is
˙
dr /dt ϭ ¨ in the positive r-direction.
r
˙
(b) Direction Change of vr . The magnitude of this change is seen
r
from the ﬁgure to be vr d␪ ϭ ˙ d␪, and its contribution to the accelerar
r˙
tion becomes ˙ d␪/dt ϭ ˙ ␪ which is in the positive ␪-direction.
(c) Magnitude Change of v␪ . This term is the change in length of
˙
˙
¨ r˙
v␪ or d(r ␪ ), and its contribution to the acceleration is d(r ␪ )/dt ϭ r ␪ ϩ ˙ ␪
and is in the positive ␪-direction.

vr′

v
vθ

vr
A

(a)
·
d (rθ )
dvr

·
vθ = rθ
·
r dθ

v′
r

·
vr = r
dθ
dθ
(b)

Figure 2/14

·
dr

68

Chapter 2

Kinematics of Particles

(d) Direction Change of v␪ . The magnitude of this change is
˙
v␪ d␪ ϭ r ␪ d␪, and the corresponding acceleration term is observed to
˙
˙
be r ␪ (d␪/dt) ϭ r ␪ 2 in the negative r-direction.

Path
a

··
··
aθ = rθ + 2rθ

·
ar = ·· – rθ 2
r
A

r

O

θ

Figure 2/15

˙
¨
Collecting terms gives ar ϭ ¨ Ϫ r ␪ 2 and a␪ ϭ r ␪ ϩ 2r ␪ as obtained
r
˙˙
previously. We see that the term ¨ is the acceleration which the particle
r
would have along the radius in the absence of a change in ␪. The term
˙
Ϫr ␪ 2 is the normal component of acceleration if r were constant, as in
¨
circular motion. The term r ␪ is the tangential acceleration which the
particle would have if r were constant, but is only a part of the acceleration due to the change in magnitude of v␪ when r is variable. Finally, the
term 2r ␪ is composed of two effects. The ﬁrst effect comes from that
˙˙
˙
portion of the change in magnitude d(r ␪ ) of v␪ due to the change in r,
and the second effect comes from the change in direction of vr. The term
2r ␪ represents, therefore, a combination of changes and is not so easily
˙˙
perceived as are the other acceleration terms.
Note the difference between the vector change dvr in vr and the
change dvr in the magnitude of vr. Similarly, the vector change dv␪ is
not the same as the change dv␪ in the magnitude of v␪. When we divide
these changes by dt to obtain expressions for the derivatives, we see
clearly that the magnitude of the derivative ͉dvr/dt͉ and the derivative of
v
the magnitude dvr/dt are not the same. Note also that ar is not ˙r and
that a␪ is not ˙␪.
v
The total acceleration a and its components are represented in Fig.
2/15. If a has a component normal to the path, we know from our analysis of n- and t-components in Art. 2/5 that the sense of the n-component
must be toward the center of curvature.
Circular Motion
For motion in a circular path with r constant, the components of
Eqs. 2/13 and 2/14 become simply
vr ϭ 0

˙
v␪ ϭ r ␪

˙
ar ϭ Ϫr ␪ 2

¨
a␪ ϭ r ␪

This description is the same as that obtained with n- and t-components,
where the ␪- and t-directions coincide but the positive r-direction is in
the negative n-direction. Thus, ar ϭ Ϫan for circular motion centered at
the origin of the polar coordinates.
The expressions for ar and a␪ in scalar form can also be obtained by
direct differentiation of the coordinate relations x ϭ r cos ␪ and y ϭ r sin ␪
x
to obtain ax ϭ ¨ and ay ϭ ¨. Each of these rectangular components of acy
celeration can then be resolved into r- and ␪-components which, when
combined, will yield the expressions of Eq. 2/14.

Article 2/6

Polar Coordinates (r- ␪)

69

SAMPLE PROBLEM 2/9
A

Rotation of the radially slotted arm is governed by ␪ ϭ 0.2t ϩ 0.02t3, where
␪ is in radians and t is in seconds. Simultaneously, the power screw in the arm
engages the slider B and controls its distance from O according to r ϭ 0.2 ϩ
0.04t2, where r is in meters and t is in seconds. Calculate the magnitudes of the
velocity and acceleration of the slider for the instant when t ϭ 3 s.

Solution.

r

θ

B
O

The coordinates and their time derivatives which appear in the ex-

ᕡ pressions for velocity and acceleration in polar coordinates are obtained ﬁrst and

v = 0.479 m /s

evaluated for t ϭ 3 s.

vr = 0.24 m /s

r ϭ 0.2 ϩ 0.04t2

r3 ϭ 0.2 ϩ 0.04(32) ϭ 0.56 m

r
˙ ϭ 0.08t

r
˙3 ϭ 0.08(3)ϭ 0.24 m/s

r
¨ ϭ 0.08

r
¨3 ϭ 0.08 m/s2

␪ ϭ 0.2t ϩ 0.02t3

␪3 ϭ 0.2(3) ϩ 0.02(33) ϭ 1.14 rad

vθ = 0.414 m /s

r = 0.56 m

or ␪3 ϭ 1.14(180/␲) ϭ 65.3Њ

˙
␪ ϭ 0.2 ϩ 0.06t2

θ = 65.3°

˙
␪ 3 ϭ 0.2 ϩ 0.06(32) ϭ 0.74 rad/s

¨
␪ ϭ 0.12t

B

¨
␪ 3 ϭ 0.12(3) ϭ 0.36 rad/s2

O

aθ = 0.557 m /s 2

The velocity components are obtained from Eq. 2/13 and for t ϭ 3 s are
[vr ϭ ˙]
r

vr ϭ 0.24 m/s

˙
[v␪ ϭ r ␪ ]

v␪ ϭ 0.56(0.74) ϭ 0.414 m/s

[v ϭ Ίvr2 ϩ v␪2]

B

v ϭ Ί(0.24)2 ϩ (0.414)2 ϭ 0.479 m/s

Ans.

The velocity and its components are shown for the speciﬁed position of the arm.
The acceleration components are obtained from Eq. 2/14 and for t ϭ 3 s are

˙
[ar ϭ ¨ Ϫ r ␪ 2]
r

θ = 65.3°
O

ar ϭ 0.08 Ϫ 0.56(0.74)2 ϭ Ϫ0.227 m/s2

¨
[a␪ ϭ r ␪ ϩ 2r ␪ ]
˙˙

a␪ ϭ 0.56(0.36) ϩ 2(0.24)(0.74) ϭ 0.557 m/s2

[a ϭ Ίar2 ϩ a␪2]

a ϭ Ί(Ϫ0.227)2 ϩ (0.557)2 ϭ 0.601 m/s2

1

Ans.

The acceleration and its components are also shown for the 65.3Њ position of the arm.
Plotted in the ﬁnal ﬁgure is the path of the slider B over the time
interval 0 Յ t Յ 5 s. This plot is generated by varying t in the given expressions for r and ␪. Conversion from polar to rectangular coordinates
is given by
x ϭ r cos ␪

y ϭ r sin ␪

ar = –0.227 m /s 2

a = 0.601 m /s 2

t=3s
0.5

r3

r3 = 0.56 m
y, m

θ 3 = 65.3°

θ3

0
t=0
t=5s
– 0.5
–1.5

Helpful Hint

ᕡ We see that this problem is an example of constrained motion where the center B of the slider is mechanically constrained by the rotation of the slotted
arm and by engagement with the turning screw.

–1

– 0.5
x, m

0

0.5

70

Chapter 2

Kinematics of Particles

SAMPLE PROBLEM 2/10

+r

A tracking radar lies in the vertical plane of the path of a rocket which is
coasting in unpowered ﬂight above the atmosphere. For the instant when ␪ ϭ
˙
30Њ, the tracking data give r ϭ 25(104) ft, ˙ ϭ 4000 ft/sec, and ␪ ϭ 0.80 deg/sec.
r
The acceleration of the rocket is due only to gravitational attraction and for its
particular altitude is 31.4 ft/sec2 vertically down. For these conditions determine
¨
the velocity v of the rocket and the values of ¨ and ␪ .
r

+θ

r

θ

Solution.

The components of velocity from Eq. 2/13 are

[vr ϭ ˙]
r

˙
ᕡ [v␪ ϭ r ␪ ]
[v ϭ Ίvr2 ϩ v␪2]

vr ϭ 4000 ft/sec
v␪ ϭ 25(104)(0.80)

␲
΂180΃ ϭ 3490 ft/sec

v ϭ Ί(4000)2 ϩ (3490)2 ϭ 5310 ft/sec

vr = 4000 ft /sec

Ans.

Since the total acceleration of the rocket is g ϭ 31.4 ft/sec2 down, we can
easily ﬁnd its r- and ␪-components for the given position. As shown in the ﬁgure,
they are

v = 5310 ft /sec

vθ = 3490 ft /sec

ᕢ

ar ϭ Ϫ31.4 cos 30Њ ϭ Ϫ27.2 ft/sec2
a␪ ϭ 31.4 sin 30Њ ϭ 15.70 ft/sec2

θ = 30°

We now equate these values to the polar-coordinate expressions for ar and a␪
¨
which contain the unknowns ¨ and ␪ . Thus, from Eq. 2/14
r

˙
r
ᕣ [ar ϭ ¨ Ϫ r ␪ 2]

΂

Ϫ27.2 ϭ ¨ Ϫ 25(104) 0.80
r

␲
180

΃

aθ = 15.70 ft /sec2

2

r
¨ ϭ 21.5 ft/sec2

¨
[a␪ ϭ r ␪ ϩ 2r ␪ ]
˙˙

Ans.

΂

¨
15.70 ϭ 25(104) ␪ ϩ 2(4000) 0.80
¨
␪ ϭ Ϫ3.84(10Ϫ4) rad/sec2

␲
180

΃

ar = –27.2 ft /sec2

θ = 30°

a = g = 31.4 ft /sec2

Ans.
Helpful Hints

ᕡ We observe that the angle ␪ in polar
coordinates need not always be taken
positive in a counterclockwise sense.

ᕢ Note that the r-component of acceleration is in the negative r-direction,
so it carries a minus sign.

˙
ᕣ We must be careful to convert ␪ from
deg/sec to rad/sec.

Article 2/6

Problems

71

2/133 A car P travels along a straight road with a constant speed v ϭ 65 mi/hr. At the instant when the
angle ␪ ϭ 60Њ, determine the values of ˙ in ft/sec
r
˙
and ␪ in deg/sec.

PROBLEMS
Introductory Problems
2/131 The position of the slider P in the rotating slotted
arm OA is controlled by a power screw as shown. At
¨
˙
the instant represented, ␪ ϭ 8 rad/s and ␪ ϭ Ϫ20
rad/s2. Also at this same instant, r ϭ 200 mm,
r
r
˙ ϭ Ϫ300 mm /s, and ¨ ϭ 0. For this instant determine the r- and ␪-components of the acceleration
of P.

P

v

r
100′

y

r
θ

A

O

x

r

θ

Problem 2/133
P

2/134 The sphere P travels in a straight line with speed
v ϭ 10 m/s. For the instant depicted, determine the
˙
corresponding values of ˙ and ␪ as measured relar
tive to the ﬁxed Oxy coordinate system.

θ

O

Problem 2/131

y
5m

2/132 A model airplane ﬂies over an observer O with constant speed in a straight line as shown. Determine
˙
the signs (plus, minus, or zero) for r, ˙, ¨, ␪, ␪ , and
r r
¨
␪ for each of the positions A, B, and C.

P

30°

y
r
C

B

v

A

v

4m

r
O

θ

x

θ

x

O
Problem 2/134

Problem 2/132

2/135 If the 10-m/s speed of the previous problem is con¨
stant, determine the values of ¨ and ␪ at the inr
stant shown.

72

Chapter 2

Kinematics of Particles

2/136 As the hydraulic cylinder rotates around O, the exposed length l of the piston rod P is controlled by
the action of oil pressure in the cylinder. If the
˙
cylinder rotates at the constant rate ␪ ϭ 60 deg /s
and l is decreasing at the constant rate of 150
mm/s, calculate the magnitudes of the velocity v
and acceleration a of end B when l ϭ 125 mm.

2/139 An internal mechanism is used to maintain a constant angular rate ⍀ ϭ 0.05 rad/s about the z-axis
of the spacecraft as the telescopic booms are extended at a constant rate. The length l is varied
from essentially zero to 3 m. The maximum acceleration to which the sensitive experiment modules
P may be subjected is 0.011 m /s2. Determine the
maximum allowable boom extension rate ˙.
l
z

l

B

Ω

mm
375

θ

O

P
P

Problem 2/136

2/137 The drag racer P starts from rest at the start line S
and then accelerates along the track. When it has
traveled 100 m, its speed is 45 m/s. For that in˙
stant, determine the values of ˙ and ␪ relative to
r
axes ﬁxed to an observer O in the grandstand G as
shown.
S
P

r

35 m

θ

l

1.2 m

1.2 m

l

Problem 2/139

2/140 The radial position of a ﬂuid particle P in a certain
centrifugal pump with radial vanes is approxi˙
mated by r ϭ r0 cosh Kt, where t is time and K ϭ ␪
is the constant angular rate at which the impeller
turns. Determine the expression for the magnitude
of the total acceleration of the particle just prior to
leaving the vane in terms of r0, R, and K.

O
G
P
Problem 2/137
R

2/138 In addition to the information supplied in the previous problem, it is known that the drag racer is accelerating forward at 10 m/s2 when it has traveled
100 m from the start line S. Determine the corre¨
sponding values of ¨ and ␪ .
r

θ
r
r0

Problem 2/140

Fixed
reference
axis

Article 2/6
2/141 The slider P can be moved inward by means of the
string S, while the slotted arm rotates about point
O. The angular position of the arm is given by ␪ ϭ
t2
0.8t Ϫ , where ␪ is in radians and t is in seconds.
20
The slider is at r ϭ 1.6 m when t ϭ 0 and thereafter
is drawn inward at the constant rate of 0.2 m/s.
Determine the magnitude and direction (expressed
by the angle ␣ relative to the x-axis) of the velocity
and acceleration of the slider when t ϭ 4 s.

Problems

73

2/143 The rocket is ﬁred vertically and tracked by the
radar station shown. When ␪ reaches 60°, other corresponding measurements give the values r ϭ
˙
30,000 ft, ¨ ϭ 70 ft/sec2, and ␪ ϭ 0.02 rad/sec.
r
Calculate the magnitudes of the velocity and acceleration of the rocket at this position.
a
v

y

P

r

r
θ

O

x

θ
S
Problem 2/141

Problem 2/143

2/142 The piston of the hydraulic cylinder gives pin A a
constant velocity v ϭ 3 ft/sec in the direction
shown for an interval of its motion. For the instant
¨
when ␪ ϭ 60Њ, determine ˙, ¨, ␪ , and ␪ where
r r ˙
r ϭ OA.

2/144 A hiker pauses to watch a squirrel P run up a partially downed tree trunk. If the squirrel’s speed is
v ϭ 2 m/s when the position s ϭ 10 m, determine
˙
the corresponding values of ˙ and ␪ .
r

r

v
P

v

r

A
O

θ

60°

θ

6″

A

O
20 m
Problem 2/144
Problem 2/142

s

74

Chapter 2

Kinematics of Particles

2/145 A jet plane ﬂying at a constant speed v at an altitude h ϭ 10 km is being tracked by radar located at
O directly below the line of ﬂight. If the angle ␪ is
decreasing at the rate of 0.020 rad/s when ␪ ϭ 60Њ,
determine the value of ¨ at this instant and the
r
magnitude of the velocity v of the plane.
v

Representative Problems
2/147 Instruments located at O are part of the groundtrafﬁc control system for a major airport. At a certain instant during the takeoff roll of the aircraft P,
the sensors indicate the angle ␪ ϭ 50Њ and the
range rate ˙ ϭ 140 ft/sec. Determine the correr
˙
sponding speed v of the aircraft and the value of ␪ .

v
P

s

h
r

20°

S
r

θ

O

500′
Problem 2/145

O

2/146 A projectile is launched from point A with the initial conditions shown. With the conventional deﬁnitions of r- and ␪-coordinates relative to the Oxy
¨
coordinate system, determine r, ␪, ˙, ␪ , ¨, and ␪ at
r ˙ r
the instant just alter launch. Neglect aerodynamic
drag.
y
v0

α

d
O

A
Problem 2/146

x

θ

x

Problem 2/147

2/148 In addition to the information supplied in the previous problem, the sensors at O indicate that
r
¨ ϭ 14 ft/sec2. Determine the corresponding accel¨
eration a of the aircraft and the value of ␪ .
2/149 The cam is designed so that the center of the roller
A which follows the contour moves on a limaçon deﬁned by r ϭ b Ϫ c cos ␪, where b Ͼ c. If the cam
does not rotate, determine the magnitude of the
total acceleration of A in terms of ␪ if the slotted
arm revolves with a constant counterclockwise
˙
angular rate ␪ ϭ ␻.

A
r

O

Problem 2/149

θ

Article 2/6
2/150 The slotted arm OA forces the small pin to move in
the ﬁxed spiral guide deﬁned by r ϭ K␪. Arm OA
starts from rest at ␪ ϭ ␲/4 and has a constant
¨
counterclockwise angular acceleration ␪ ϭ ␣. Determine the magnitude of the acceleration of the
pin P when ␪ ϭ 3␲/4.
A

Problems

75

2/152 For an interval of motion the drum of radius b
turns clockwise at a constant rate ␻ in radians per
second and causes the carriage P to move to the
right as the unwound length of the connecting
cable is shortened. Use polar coordinates r and ␪
and derive expressions for the velocity v and acceleration a of P in the horizontal guide in terms of
the angle ␪. Check your solution by a direct differentiation with time of the relation x2 ϩ h2 ϭ r2.

P

θ

r

θ

r

h

O
ω

Problem 2/150

b

P

2/151 A rocket is tracked by radar from its launching
point A. When it is 10 seconds into its ﬂight, the
following radar measurements are recorded:
r ϭ 2200 m, ˙ ϭ 500 m/s, ¨ ϭ 4.66 m/s2, ␪ ϭ 22Њ,
r
r
¨
˙
␪ ϭ 0.0788 rad/s, and ␪ ϭ Ϫ0.0341 rad/s2. For this
instant determine the angle ␤ between the horizontal and the direction of the trajectory of the rocket
and ﬁnd the magnitudes of its velocity v and acceleration a.

r

x
Problem 2/152

2/153 Car A is moving with constant speed v on the
straight and level highway. The police ofﬁcer in the
stationary car P attempts to measure the speed v
with radar. If the radar measures “line-of sight” velocity, what velocity vЈ will the ofﬁcer observe?
Evaluate your general expression for the values
v ϭ 70 mi/hr, L ϭ 500 ft, and D ϭ 20 ft, and draw
any appropriate conclusions.

β
θ

A

v
D
P

r
L

θ

Problem 2/153

A
Problem 2/151

76

Chapter 2

Kinematics of Particles

2/154 The hydraulic cylinder gives pin A a constant velocity v ϭ 2 m/s along its axis for an interval of motion and, in turn, causes the slotted arm to rotate
¨
about O. Determine the values of ˙, ¨, and ␪ for
r r
the instant when ␪ ϭ 30Њ. (Hint: Recognize that all
acceleration components are zero when the velocity
is constant.)

A

2/156 The member OA of the industrial robot telescopes
and pivots about the ﬁxed axis at point O. At
˙
¨
the instant shown, ␪ ϭ 60Њ, ␪ ϭ 1.2 rad/s, ␪ ϭ 0.8
¨
˙
rad/s2 , OA ϭ 0.9 m , OA ϭ 0.5 m/s , a n d OA ϭ
2 . Determine the magnitudes of the velocity
Ϫ6 m/s
and acceleration of joint A of the robot. Also, sketch
the velocity and acceleration of A and determine
the angles which these vectors make with the positive x-axis. The base of the robot does not revolve
about a vertical axis.

v
1.1 m
A

0.9 m

θ

15°
y

P

r
O

30°
O

θ

x

300 mm
Problem 2/154
Problem 2/156

2/155 The particle P moves along the parabolic surface
shown. When x ϭ 0.2 m, the particle speed is
v ϭ 5 m/s. For this instant determine the corre˙
sponding values of r, ˙, ␪, and ␪ . Both x and y are
r
in meters.
y
y = 4x2

2/157 The robot arm is elevating and extending simulta˙
neously. At a given instant, ␪ ϭ 30Њ, ␪ ϭ 10 deg/s ϭ
constant, l ϭ 0.5 m, ˙ ϭ 0.2 m/s, and ¨ ϭ Ϫ0.3 m/s2.
l
l
Compute the magnitudes of the velocity v and
acceleration a of the gripped part P. In addition,
express v and a in terms of the unit vectors i and j.
y
l

P

5m
0.7

P

r

O

θ

θ

x

O

Problem 2/157
Problem 2/155

x

Article 2/6
2/158 During a portion of a vertical loop, an airplane ﬂies
in an arc of radius ␳ ϭ 600 m with a constant speed
v ϭ 400 km /h. When the airplane is at A, the angle
made by v with the horizontal is ␤ ϭ 30Њ, and radar
tracking gives r ϭ 800 m and ␪ ϭ 30Њ. Calculate vr,
¨
v␪, ar, and ␪ for this instant.

Problems

77

2/160 The low-ﬂying aircraft P is traveling at a constant
speed of 360 km/h in the holding circle of radius
3 km. For the instant shown, determine the quanti˙
¨
ties r, ˙, ¨, ␪, ␪ , and ␪ relative to the ﬁxed x-y coorr r
dinate system, which has its origin on a mountaintop
at O. Treat the system as two-dimensional.

r

y

v

P
v

β

A

r

m
3k

θ

C
r
12 km
θ

θ

x

O
16 km

B
Problem 2/160
Problem 2/158

2/159 The particle P starts from rest at point O at time
t ϭ 0, and then undergoes a constant tangential acceleration at as it negotiates the circular slot in the
counterclockwise direction. Determine r, ˙, ␪, and
r
˙
␪ as functions of time over the ﬁrst revolution.

2/161 Pin A moves in a circle of 90-mm radius as crank
˙
AC revolves at the constant rate ␤ ϭ 60 rad/s. The
slotted link rotates about point O as the rod attached to A moves in and out of the slot. For the
¨
position ␤ ϭ 30Њ, determine ˙, ¨, ␪ , and ␪ .
r r ˙
θ

A

r

r
90 mm

P
O

θ

β

b
300 mm
r
y

Problem 2/161
θ

x
O
Problem 2/159

C

78

Chapter 2

Kinematics of Particles

2/162 A ﬁreworks shell P ﬁred in a vertical trajectory has
a y-acceleration given by ay ϭ Ϫg Ϫ kv2, where the
latter term is due to aerodynamic drag. If the speed
of the shell is 15 m/s at the instant shown, deter˙
¨
mine the corresponding values of r, ˙, ¨, ␪, ␪ , and ␪ .
r r
The drag parameter k has a constant value of
0.01 mϪ1.

᭤2/164 At time t ϭ 0, the baseball player releases a ball
with the initial conditions shown in the ﬁgure.
˙
¨
Determine the quantities r, ˙, ¨, ␪, ␪ , and ␪ , all
r r
relative to the x-y coordinate system shown, at
time t ϭ 0.5 sec.
y
v0 = 100 ft/sec

y
v

α = 30°

P
6′

r

θ

100 m

200 m

x

x

O
Problem 2/164

Problem 2/162

2/163 An earth satellite traveling in the elliptical orbit
shown has a velocity v ϭ 12,149 mi /hr as it passes
the end of the semiminor axis at A. The acceleration of the satellite at A is due to gravitational
2
attraction and is 32.23[3959 /8400] ϭ 7.159 ft /sec2
directed from A to O. For position A calculate the
¨
values of ˙, ¨, ␪ , and ␪ .
r r ˙
8400 mi
v

A
r

7275 mi

θ

P
O

4200
mi
Problem 2/163

Article 2/7

2/7

Space Curvilinear Motion

79

Space Curvilinear Motion

The general case of three-dimensional motion of a particle along a
space curve was introduced in Art. 2/1 and illustrated in Fig. 2/1. Three
coordinate systems, rectangular (x-y-z), cylindrical (r-␪-z), and spherical
(R-␪-␾), are commonly used to describe this motion. These systems are
indicated in Fig. 2/16, which also shows the unit vectors for the three coordinate systems.*
Before describing the use of these coordinate systems, we note that
a path-variable description, using n- and t-coordinates, which we developed in Art. 2/5, can be applied in the osculating plane shown in Fig.
2/1. We deﬁned this plane as the plane which contains the curve at the
location in question. We see that the velocity v, which is along the tangent t to the curve, lies in the osculating plane. The acceleration a also
lies in the osculating plane. As in the case of plane motion, it has a comv
ponent at ϭ ˙ tangent to the path due to the change in magnitude of
the velocity and a component an ϭ v2/␳ normal to the curve due to the
change in direction of the velocity. As before, ␳ is the radius of curvature of the path at the point in question and is measured in the osculating plane. This description of motion, which is natural and direct for
many plane-motion problems, is awkward to use for space motion because the osculating plane continually shifts its orientation. We will
conﬁne our attention, therefore, to the three ﬁxed coordinate systems
shown in Fig. 2/16.

Rectangular Coordinates (x-y-z)
The extension from two to three dimensions offers no particular difﬁculty. We merely add the z-coordinate and its two time derivatives to
the two-dimensional expressions of Eqs. 2/6 so that the position vector
R, the velocity v, and the acceleration a become
R ϭ xi ϩ yj ϩ zk

˙ x
y
z
v ϭ R ϭ ˙i ϩ ˙j ϩ ˙k

(2/15)

a ϭ ˙ ϭ R ϭ ¨i ϩ ¨j ϩ ¨k
v ¨
x
y
z
Note that in three dimensions we are using R in place of r for the position vector.

Cylindrical Coordinates (r-␪-z)
If we understand the polar-coordinate description of plane motion,
then there should be no difﬁculty with cylindrical coordinates because
all that is required is the addition of the z-coordinate and its two time
derivatives. The position vector R to the particle for cylindrical coordinates is simply
R ϭ rer ϩ zk
*In a variation of spherical coordinates commonly used, angle ␾ is replaced by its
complement.

θ
φ

R
eθ

z

eR

eφ
P

φ
O

y

R

k

z

j
eθ

r

θ

er

i
x

Figure 2/16

80

Chapter 2

Kinematics of Particles

In place of Eq. 2/13 for plane motion, we can write the velocity as

˙
v ϭ ˙er ϩ r ␪ e␪ ϩ ˙k
r
z
where

(2/16)

vr ϭ ˙
r

˙
v␪ ϭ r ␪
vz ϭ ˙
z
v ϭ Ίvr2 ϩ v␪2 ϩ vz2
Similarly, the acceleration is written by adding the z-component to Eq.
2/14, which gives us

˙
¨
z
a ϭ (r Ϫ r ␪ 2)er ϩ (r ␪ ϩ 2r ␪ )e␪ ϩ ¨k
¨
˙˙
where

(2/17)

˙
r
ar ϭ ¨ Ϫ r ␪ 2
¨
a␪ ϭ r ␪ ϩ 2r ␪ ϭ
˙˙

1 d 2˙
(r ␪ )
r dt

az ϭ ¨
z
a ϭ Ίar2 ϩ a␪2 ϩ az2
Whereas the unit vectors er and e␪ have nonzero time derivatives due
to the changes in their directions, we note that the unit vector k in
the z-direction remains fixed in direction and therefore has a zero
time derivative.

Spherical Coordinates (R-␪-␾)
Spherical coordinates R, ␪, ␾ are utilized when a radial distance and
two angles are utilized to specify the position of a particle, as in the case
of radar measurements, for example. Derivation of the expression for
the velocity v is easily obtained, but the expression for the acceleration
a is more complex because of the added geometry. Consequently, only
the results will be cited here.* First we designate unit vectors eR, e␪, e␾
as shown in Fig. 2/16. Note that the unit vector eR is in the direction in
which the particle P would move if R increases but ␪ and ␾ are held constant. The unit vector e␪ is in the direction in which P would move if ␪
increases while R and ␾ are held constant. Finally, the unit vector e␾ is
in the direction in which P would move if ␾ increases while R and ␪ are
held constant. The resulting expressions for v and a are
v ϭ vReR ϩ v␪e␪ ϩ v␾e␾
where

(2/18)

˙
vR ϭ R
˙
v␪ ϭ R ␪ cos ␾
˙
v␾ ϭ R␾

*For a complete derivation of v and a in spherical coordinates, see the ﬁrst author’s book
Dynamics, 2nd edition, 1971, or SI Version, 1975 (John Wiley & Sons, Inc.).

Article 2/7

and
a ϭ aReR ϩ a␪e␪ ϩ a␾e␾
where

(2/19)

¨
˙
˙
aR ϭ R Ϫ R␾ 2 Ϫ R ␪ 2 cos2 ␾
cos ␾ d
˙
˙˙
a␪ ϭ
(R2 ␪ ) Ϫ 2R ␪ ␾ sin ␾
R dt
a␾ ϭ

1 d
˙
˙
(R2 ␾ ) ϩ R ␪ 2 sin ␾ cos ␾
R dt

© Howard Sayer/Alamy

Linear algebraic transformations between any two of the three
coordinate-system expressions for velocity or acceleration can be developed. These transformations make it possible to express the motion
component in rectangular coordinates, for example, if the components
are known in spherical coordinates, or vice versa.* These transformations are easily handled with the aid of matrix algebra and a simple
computer program.

A portion of the track of this amusement-park ride is in the shape of a
helix whose axis is horizontal.
*These coordinate transformations are developed and illustrated in the ﬁrst author’s book
Dynamics, 2nd edition, 1971, or SI Version, 1975 (John Wiley & Sons, Inc.).

Space Curvilinear Motion

81

82

Chapter 2

Kinematics of Particles

SAMPLE PROBLEM 2/11

z

˙
The power screw starts from rest and is given a rotational speed ␪ which in˙ ϭ kt, where k is a constant. Detercreases uniformly with time t according to ␪

b

mine the expressions for the velocity v and acceleration a of the center of ball A
when the screw has turned through one complete revolution from rest. The lead
of the screw (advancement per revolution) is L.

r

·
θ

A

2r0

Solution.

The center of ball A moves in a helix on the cylindrical surface of radius b, and the cylindrical coordinates r, ␪, z are clearly indicated.

˙
Integrating the given relation for ␪ gives ␪ ϭ ⌬␪ ϭ
revolution from rest we have

˙
͵ ␪ dt ϭ

1 2
2 kt . For one

2␲ ϭ 1 kt2
2

z

giving

az

t ϭ 2Ί␲/k
Thus, the angular rate at one revolution is

r

ar

A

v

γ
aθ

˙
␪ ϭ kt ϭ k(2Ί␲/k) ϭ 2Ί␲k

θ

ᕡ

The helix angle ␥ of the path followed by the center of the ball governs the
relation between the ␪- and z-components of velocity and is given by tan ␥ ϭ
˙
˙
L/(2␲b). Now from the ﬁgure we see that v␪ ϭ v cos ␥. Substituting v␪ ϭ r ␪ ϭ b ␪
˙
ᕢ from Eq. 2/16 gives v ϭ v␪/cos ␥ ϭ b ␪ /cos ␥. With cos ␥ obtained from tan ␥ and
˙
with ␪ ϭ 2Ί␲k, we have for the one-revolution position
Ans.
The acceleration components from Eq. 2/17 become

ᕣ [ar ϭ ¨ Ϫ ˙
r

r ␪ 2]

ar ϭ 0 Ϫ

b(2Ί␲k)2

lead L by the circumference 2␲b and
not the diameter 2b to obtain tan ␥.
If in doubt, unwrap one turn of the
helix traced by the center of the ball.
that for tan ␤ ϭ a/b the cosine of ␤
becomes b/Ίa2 ϩ b2.

a␪ ϭ bk ϩ 2(0)(2Ί␲k) ϭ bk

[az ϭ ¨ ϭ ˙z]
z
v

ᕡ We must be careful to divide the

ᕢ Sketch a right triangle and recall

ϭ Ϫ4b␲k

¨
[a␪ ϭ r ␪ ϩ 2r ␪ ]
˙˙

Helpful Hints

d
d
d ˙
(v ) ϭ
(v tan ␥) ϭ
(b ␪ tan ␥)
az ϭ
dt z
dt ␪
dt
kL
L
¨
ϭ (b tan ␥) ␪ ϭ b
kϭ
2␲
2␲b

ᕣ The negative sign for ar is consistent
with our previous knowledge that
the normal component of acceleration is directed toward the center of
curvature.

Now we combine the components to give the magnitude of the total acceleration, which becomes

Ans.

Article 2/7

SAMPLE PROBLEM 2/12

Space Curvilinear Motion

83

z

An aircraft P takes off at A with a velocity v0 of 250 km/h and
climbs in the vertical yЈ-zЈ plane at the constant 15Њ angle with an
acceleration along its flight path of 0.8 m/s2. Flight progress is
monitored by radar at point O. (a) Resolve the velocity of P into
cylindrical-coordinate components 60 seconds after takeoff and find
r ˙
z
˙, ␪ , and ˙ for that instant. (b) Resolve the velocity of the aircraft
P into spherical-coordinate components 60 seconds after takeoff
˙ ˙
˙
and find R, ␪ , and ␾ for that instant.

P
y

R

O

z

r

y′

z′
3 km

15°

v0
A
x

Solution. (a) The accompanying ﬁgure shows the velocity and acceleration vectors in the yЈ-zЈ plane. The takeoff speed is

z
a

250
v0 ϭ
ϭ 69.4 m/s
3.6
y

and the speed after 60 seconds is

z

s

r

y′

z′

The distance s traveled after takeoff is

3000 m

15°

v0

1
1
s ϭ s0 ϩ v0 t ϩ at2 ϭ 0 ϩ 69.4(60) ϩ (0.8)(60)2 ϭ 5610 m
2
2

y

A
x

The y-coordinate and associated angle ␪ are

(a)

y ϭ 5610 cos 15Њ ϭ 5420 m
␪ ϭ tanϪ1

P

R

O

v ϭ v0 ϩ at ϭ 69.4 ϩ 0.8(60) ϭ 117.4 m/s

5420
ϭ 61.0Њ
3000

vxy

From the ﬁgure (b) of x-y projections, we have

vr

v

r ϭ Ί30002 ϩ 54202 ϭ 6190 m
vxy ϭ v cos 15Њ ϭ 117.4 cos 15Њ ϭ 113.4 m/s
r
vr ϭ ˙ ϭ vxy sin ␪ ϭ 113.4 sin 61.0Њ ϭ 99.2 m/s

y
r

Ans.

y

˙
v␪ ϭ r ␪ ϭ vxy cos ␪ ϭ 113.4 cos 61.0Њ ϭ 55.0 m/s

z
˙ ϭ vz ϭ v sin 15Њ ϭ 117.4 sin 15Њ ϭ 30.4 m/s

Finally

Ans.

= 61.0°
3000 m

O

Ans.

(b)

(b) Refer to the accompanying ﬁgure (c), which shows the x-y plane
and various velocity components projected into the vertical plane containing r and R. Note that

vxy = 113.4 m/s

z ϭ y tan 15Њ ϭ 5420 tan 15Њ ϭ 1451 m

ϭ

Ί61902

ϩ

14512

ϭ 6360 m

y

v =R

r=

From the ﬁgure,

˙
vR ϭ R ϭ 99.2 cos 13.19Њ ϩ 30.4 sin 13.19Њ ϭ 103.6 m/s

Ans.

˙
␪ ϭ 8.88(10Ϫ3) rad/s, as in part (a)

Ans.
O

˙
v␾ ϭ R␾ ϭ 30.4 cos 13.19Њ Ϫ 99.2 sin 13.19Њ ϭ 6.95 m/s
˙
␾ϭ

6.95
ϭ 1.093(10Ϫ3) rad/s
6360

99.2 m/s

vz

m

ϩ

z2

z
1451
ϭ tanϪ1
ϭ 13.19Њ
r
6190

90

Rϭ

Ίr2

·
vR = R

99.2 m/s
55.0 m/s

61

␾ ϭ tanϪ1

x

z=

·

14
51
m

y = 5420 m

= 61.0°
3000 m
z

Ans.
(c)

R
x

=1
3
61 .19°
90
m

55.0
ϭ 8.88(10Ϫ3) rad/s
6190

r=

˙
␪ϭ

So

v

84

Chapter 2

Kinematics of Particles

PROBLEMS
Introductory Problems
2/165 The velocity and acceleration of a particle are given
for a certain instant by v ϭ 6i Ϫ 3j ϩ 2k m/s and
a ϭ 3i Ϫ j Ϫ 5k m/s2. Determine the angle ␪ between v and a, ˙, and the radius of curvature ␳ in
v
the osculating plane.

2/168 The radar antenna at P tracks the jet aircraft A,
which is ﬂying horizontally at a speed u and an altitude h above the level of P. Determine the expressions for the components of the velocity in the
spherical coordinates of the antenna motion.

A
z

2/166 A projectile is launched from point O with an initial
speed v0 ϭ 500 ft /sec directed as shown in the ﬁgure. Compute the x-, y-, and z-components of position, velocity, and acceleration 20 seconds after
launch. Neglect aerodynamic drag.

u
y

P

z

θ

b

v0
y

x
Problem 2/168

60°
O

h

φ

20°
x
Problem 2/166

2/167 An amusement ride called the “corkscrew” takes
the passengers through the upside-down curve of a
horizontal cylindrical helix. The velocity of the cars
as they pass position A is 15 m/s, and the component of their acceleration measured along the tangent to the path is g cos ␥ at this point. The effective
radius of the cylindrical helix is 5 m, and the helix
angle is ␥ ϭ 40Њ. Compute the magnitude of the acceleration of the passengers as they pass position A.

2/169 The rotating element in a mixing chamber is given
a periodic axial movement z ϭ z0 sin 2␲nt while it
˙
is rotating at the constant angular velocity ␪ ϭ ␻.
Determine the expression for the maximum magnitude of the acceleration of a point A on the rim of
radius r. The frequency n of vertical oscillation is
constant.
z

z = z0 sin 2π nt

ω

r
A

Ho
riz
. Horiz.
5m
Vert.

γ = 40°

Problem 2/167

A

Problem 2/169

Article 2/7

Representative Problems
2/170 The vertical shaft of the industrial robot rotates at
the constant rate ␻. The length h of the vertical
shaft has a known time history, and this is true
˙
¨
of its time derivatives h and h as well. Likewise,
˙, and ¨ are known. Determine
the values of l, l
l
the magnitudes of the velocity and acceleration of
point P. The lengths h0 and l0 are ﬁxed.

85

2/172 An aircraft takes off at A and climbs at a steady
angle with a slope of 1 to 2 in the vertical y-z plane
at a constant speed v ϭ 400 km/h. The aircraft is
tracked by radar at O. For the position B, deter˙ ˙
˙
mine the values of R, ␪ , and ␾ .
z
B
A

z

Problems

v

1
2

300 m
l0
l

R
φ

h

500 m

P
ω

·

O

h0

y

θ

x
Problem 2/172

Problem 2/170

2/171 The car A is ascending a parking-garage ramp in
the form of a cylindrical helix of 24-ft radius rising
10 ft for each half turn. At the position shown the
car has a speed of 15 mi/hr, which is decreasing at
the rate of 2 mi/hr per second. Determine the r-, ␪-,
and z-components of the acceleration of the car.

z

2/173 For the conditions of Prob. 2/172, ﬁnd the values of
¨ ¨
¨
R, ␪ , and ␾ for the radar tracking coordinates as
the aircraft passes point B. Use the results cited for
Prob. 2/172.
2/174 The rotating nozzle sprays a large circular area and
˙
turns with the constant angular rate ␪ ϭ K. Particles of water move along the tube at the constant
rate ˙ϭ c relative to the tube. Write expressions
l
for the magnitudes of the velocity and acceleration
of a water particle P for a given position l in the
rotating tube.

24′
A

r

z

θ

10′

β

P

24′
·
θ=K

Problem 2/171

l

Problem 2/174

86

Chapter 2

Kinematics of Particles

2/175 The small block P travels with constant speed v in
the circular path of radius r on the inclined surface.
If ␪ ϭ 0 at time t ϭ 0, determine the x-, y-, and
z-components of velocity and acceleration as functions of time.
z

n

r

2/177 The base structure of the ﬁretruck ladder rotates
about a vertical axis through O with a constant angular velocity ⍀ ϭ 10 deg/s. At the same time, the
˙
ladder unit OB elevates at a constant rate ␾ ϭ
7 deg /s, and section AB of the ladder extends from
within section OA at the constant rate of 0.5 m/s.
At the instant under consideration, ␾ ϭ 30Њ,
OA ϭ 9 m, and AB ϭ 6 m. Determine the magnitudes of the velocity and acceleration of the end B
of the ladder.

v
P

y
30°

Ω

B
A

C

x
Problem 2/175

O

2/176 An aircraft is ﬂying in a horizontal circle of radius b
with a constant speed u at an altitude h. A radar
tracking unit is located at C. Write expressions for
the components of the velocity of the aircraft in the
spherical coordinates of the radar station for a
given position ␤.

φ
θ

C

z
Problem 2/177
O

b
β

u
h

R
y

φ

C

2/178 The member OA of the industrial robot telescopes.
˙
At the instant represented, ␾ ϭ 60Њ, ␾ ϭ 1.2 rad/s,
˙
¨
␾ ϭ 0.8 rad/s2, OA ϭ 0.9 m, OA ϭ 0.5 m/s , and
¨
OA ϭ Ϫ6 m/s2. The base of the robot is revolving at
the constant rate ␻ ϭ 1.4 rad/s. Calculate the magnitudes of the velocity and acceleration of joint A.

1.1 m
r
θ

A

0.9 m

15°
z

P

x
Problem 2/176

O

φ

x
ω

Problem 2/178

Article 2/7
2/179 Consider the industrial robot of the previous problem. The telescoping member OA is now ﬁxed in
length at 0.9 m. The other conditions remain at
˙
¨
␾ ϭ 60Њ, ␾ ϭ 1.2 rad /s, ␾ ϭ 0.8 rad/s2, ␻ ϭ 1.4 rad/s,
␻ ϭ 0, and angle OAP is locked at 105°. Determine
˙
the magnitudes of the velocity and acceleration of
the end point P.
2/180 In a design test of the actuating mechanism for a
telescoping antenna on a spacecraft, the supporting
shaft rotates about the ﬁxed z-axis with an angular
˙
rate ␪ . Determine the R-, ␪-, and ␾-components of
the acceleration a of the end of the antenna at the
instant when L ϭ 1.2 m and ␤ ϭ 45Њ if the rates
˙
˙
˙
␪ ϭ 2 rad/s, ␤ ϭ 3 rad/s, and L ϭ 0.9 m/s are con2
stant during the motion.
φ

R

87

᭤ 2/181 In the design of an amusement-park ride, the cars
are attached to arms of length R which are hinged
to a central rotating collar which drives the assembly about the vertical axis with a constant angular
˙
rate ␻ ϭ ␪ . The cars rise and fall with the track according to the relation z ϭ (h /2)(1 Ϫ cos 2␪). Find
the R-, ␪-, and ␾-components of the velocity v of
each car as it passes the position ␪ ϭ ␲/4 rad.
v

y

R z
φ

h

ω

x

θ

θ

h

z

Problem 2/181

β

·
θ

θ

Problems

L

y

᭤ 2/182 The particle P moves down the spiral path which is
wrapped around the surface of a right circular cone
of base radius b and altitude h. The angle ␥ between the tangent to the curve at any point and a
horizontal tangent to the cone at this point is constant. Also the motion of the particle is controlled
˙
so that ␪ is constant. Determine the expression for
the radial acceleration ar of the particle for any
value of ␪.
z

x
Problem 2/180
b
r
P
h

y

x
Problem 2/182

88

Chapter 2

Kinematics of Particles

2/8

Relative Motion (Translating Axes)

Stocktrek Images, Inc.

In the previous articles of this chapter, we have described particle
motion using coordinates referred to fixed reference axes. The displacements, velocities, and accelerations so determined are termed absolute. It is not always possible or convenient, however, to use a fixed
set of axes to describe or to measure motion. In addition, there are
many engineering problems for which the analysis of motion is simplified by using measurements made with respect to a moving reference
system. These measurements, when combined with the absolute motion of the moving coordinate system, enable us to determine the absolute motion in question. This approach is called a relative-motion
analysis.

Relative motion is a critical issue in
the midair refueling of aircraft.

y
A

Y
j

rA/B

rA

B

x

i

rB
O

X

Figure 2/17

Choice of Coordinate System
The motion of the moving coordinate system is speciﬁed with respect to a ﬁxed coordinate system. Strictly speaking, in Newtonian mechanics, this ﬁxed system is the primary inertial system, which is
assumed to have no motion in space. For engineering purposes, the ﬁxed
system may be taken as any system whose absolute motion is negligible
for the problem at hand. For most earthbound engineering problems, it
is sufﬁciently precise to take for the ﬁxed reference system a set of axes
attached to the earth, in which case we neglect the motion of the earth.
For the motion of satellites around the earth, a nonrotating coordinate
system is chosen with its origin on the axis of rotation of the earth. For
interplanetary travel, a nonrotating coordinate system ﬁxed to the sun
would be used. Thus, the choice of the ﬁxed system depends on the type
of problem involved.
We will conﬁne our attention in this article to moving reference
systems which translate but do not rotate. Motion measured in rotating
systems will be discussed in Art. 5/7 of Chapter 5 on rigid-body kinematics, where this approach ﬁnds special but important application. We
will also conﬁne our attention here to relative-motion analysis for plane
motion.
Vector Representation
Now consider two particles A and B which may have separate
curvilinear motions in a given plane or in parallel planes, Fig. 2/17. We
will arbitrarily attach the origin of a set of translating (nonrotating)
axes x-y to particle B and observe the motion of A from our moving position on B. The position vector of A as measured relative to the frame
x-y is rA/B ϭ xi ϩ yj, where the subscript notation “A/B” means “A relative to B” or “A with respect to B.” The unit vectors along the x- and
y-axes are i and j, and x and y are the coordinates of A measured in the
x-y frame. The absolute position of B is defined by the vector rB measured from the origin of the fixed axes X-Y. The absolute position of A
is seen, therefore, to be determined by the vector
rA ϭ rB ϩ rA/B

Article 2/8

Relative Motion (Translating Axes)

We now differentiate this vector equation once with respect to time
to obtain velocities and twice to obtain accelerations. Thus,
r
r
r
˙A ϭ ˙B ϩ ˙A/B

or

vA ϭ vB ϩ vA/B

(2/20)

r
r
r
¨A ϭ ¨B ϩ ¨A/B

or

aA ϭ aB ϩ aA/B

(2/21)

In Eq. 2/20 the velocity which we observe A to have from our position
r
x
y
at B attached to the moving axes x-y is ˙A/B ϭ vA/B ϭ ˙i ϩ ˙j. This
term is the velocity of A with respect to B. Similarly, in Eq. 2/21 the
acceleration which we observe A to have from our nonrotating posir
v
x
y
tion on B is ¨A/B ϭ ˙A/B ϭ ¨i ϩ ¨j. This term is the acceleration of A
with respect to B. We note that the unit vectors i and j have zero derivatives because their directions as well as their magnitudes remain
unchanged. (Later when we discuss rotating reference axes, we must
account for the derivatives of the unit vectors when they change direction.)
Equation 2/20 (or 2/21) states that the absolute velocity (or acceleration) of A equals the absolute velocity (or acceleration) of B plus, vectorially, the velocity (or acceleration) of A relative to B. The relative term
is the velocity (or acceleration) measurement which an observer attached to the moving coordinate system x-y would make. We can express
the relative-motion terms in whatever coordinate system is convenient—
rectangular, normal and tangential, or polar—and the formulations in
the preceding articles can be used for this purpose. The appropriate
ﬁxed system of the previous articles becomes the moving system in the
present article.

Additional Considerations
The selection of the moving point B for attachment of the reference
coordinate system is arbitrary. As shown in Fig. 2/18, point A could be
used just as well for the attachment of the moving system, in which case
the three corresponding relative-motion equations for position, velocity,
and acceleration are
rB ϭ rA ϩ rB/A

vB ϭ vA ϩ vB/A

y

aB ϭ aA ϩ aB/A

It is seen, therefore, that rB/A ϭ ϪrA/B, vB/A ϭ ϪvA/B, and aB/A ϭ ϪaA/B.
In relative-motion analysis, it is important to realize that the acceleration of a particle as observed in a translating system x-y is the
same as that observed in a fixed system X-Y if the moving system has a
constant velocity. This conclusion broadens the application of Newton’s second law of motion (Chapter 3). We conclude, consequently,
that a set of axes which has a constant absolute velocity may be used
in place of a “fixed” system for the determination of accelerations. A
translating reference system which has no acceleration is called an inertial system.

A

Y

x

rB/A

rA
B
rB

X

O

Figure 2/18

89

90

Chapter 2

Kinematics of Particles

SAMPLE PROBLEM 2/13
Passengers in the jet transport A ﬂying east at a speed of 800 km/h observe
a second jet plane B that passes under the transport in horizontal ﬂight. Although the nose of B is pointed in the 45Њ northeast direction, plane B appears to
the passengers in A to be moving away from the transport at the 60Њ angle as
shown. Determine the true velocity of B.

60°
B
y

Solution.

The moving reference axes x-y are attached to A, from which the
relative observations are made. We write, therefore,

ᕡ

vB ϭ vA ϩ vB/A

Next we identify the knowns and unknowns. The velocity vA is given in both magnitude and direction. The 60Њ direction of vB/A, the velocity which B appears to
ᕢ have to the moving observers in A, is known, and the true velocity of B is in the
45Њ direction in which it is heading. The two remaining unknowns are the magniᕣ tudes of vB and vB/A. We may solve the vector equation in any one of three ways.

A

45°

x

Helpful Hints

(I) Graphical.

We start the vector sum at some point P by drawing vA to a
convenient scale and then construct a line through the tip of vA with the known
direction of vB/A. The known direction of vB is then drawn through P, and the intersection C yields the unique solution enabling us to complete the vector triangle and scale off the unknown magnitudes, which are found to be
vB/A ϭ 586 km/h

and

vB ϭ 717 km/h

ᕡ We treat each airplane as a particle.
ᕢ We assume no side slip due to cross
wind.

ᕣ Students should become familiar
with all three solutions.

Ans.
Dir. of vB/A

(II) Trigonometric.

A sketch of the vector triangle is made to reveal the
trigonometry, which gives
vA
vB
ϭ
sin 60Њ sin 75Њ

ᕤ

sin 60Њ
vB ϭ 800
ϭ 717 km/h
sin 75Њ

P

Ans.

60°
vA = 800 km /h
C

Dir. of vB

(III) Vector Algebra.

Using unit vectors i and j, we express the velocities in

vector form as

P

vA ϭ 800i km/h

45°

60°
vA

vB ϭ (vB cos 45Њ)i ϩ (vB sin 45Њ)j

vB/A ϭ (vB/A cos 60Њ)(Ϫi) ϩ (vB/A sin 60Њ)j
Substituting these relations into the relative-velocity equation and solving separately for the i and j terms give
(i-terms)

vB sin 45Њ ϭ vB/A sin 60Њ

and

vB ϭ 717 km/h

vB/A
60°

vA

ᕤ We must be prepared to recognize

ᕥ Solving simultaneously yields the unknown velocity magnitudes
vB/A ϭ 586 km/h

75°

45°

vB cos 45Њ ϭ 800 Ϫ vB/A cos 60Њ

(j-terms)

vB

Ans.

It is worth noting the solution of this problem from the viewpoint of an observer
in B. With reference axes attached to B, we would write vA ϭ vB ϩ vA/B. The apparent velocity of A as observed by B is then vA/B, which is the negative of vB/A.

the appropriate trigonometric relation, which here is the law of sines.

ᕥ We can see that the graphical or
trigonometric solution is shorter
than the vector algebra solution in
this particular problem.

Article 2/8

Relative Motion (Translating Axes)

SAMPLE PROBLEM 2/14

91

y

Car A is accelerating in the direction of its motion at the rate of 3 ft/sec2.
Car B is rounding a curve of 440-ft radius at a constant speed of 30 mi/hr. Determine the velocity and acceleration which car B appears to have to an observer in
car A if car A has reached a speed of 45 mi/hr for the positions represented.

x
A
30°
440′
n

Solution.

We choose nonrotating reference axes attached to car A since the
motion of B with respect to A is desired.

B

Velocity.

The relative-velocity equation is
vA = 66 ft /sec

vB ϭ vA ϩ vB/A

θ

60°

and the velocities of A and B for the position considered have the magnitudes
vB = 44 ft/sec

vB/A

5280
44
ϭ 66 ft/sec
vA ϭ 45
ϭ 45
30
602

44
vB ϭ 30
ϭ 44 ft/sec
30

The triangle of velocity vectors is drawn in the sequence required by the equation, and application of the law of cosines and the law of sines gives

ᕡ

vB/A ϭ 58.2 ft/sec

␪ ϭ 40.9Њ

aB = 4.4 ft/sec2
a B/A

Ans.

β

30°
aA = 3 ft/sec2

Acceleration.

The relative-acceleration equation is
Helpful Hints
aB ϭ aA ϩ aB/A

ᕡ Alternatively, we could use either

The acceleration of A is given, and the acceleration of B is normal to the curve in
the n-direction and has the magnitude
[an ϭ v2/␳]

The triangle of acceleration vectors is drawn in the sequence required by the
equation as illustrated. Solving for the x- and y-components of aB/A gives us
(aB/A)x ϭ 4.4 cos 30Њ Ϫ 3 ϭ 0.810 ft/sec2
(aB/A)y ϭ 4.4 sin 30Њ ϭ 2.2 ft/sec2
Ans.

The direction of aB/A may be speciﬁed by the angle ␤ which, by the law of sines,
becomes

ᕢ

2.34
4.4
ϭ
sin ␤ sin 30Њ

␤ ϭ sinϪ1

4.4
΂2.34 0.5΃ ϭ 110.2Њ

ᕢ Be careful to choose between the two
values 69.8Њ and 180 Ϫ 69.8 ϭ 110.2Њ.

aB ϭ (44)2/440 ϭ 4.4 ft/sec2

from which aB/A ϭ Ί(0.810)2 ϩ (2.2)2 ϭ 2.34 ft/sec2

a graphical or a vector algebraic
solution.

Ans.

Suggestion: To gain familiarity with the
manipulation of vector equations, it is
suggested that the student rewrite the
relative-motion equations in the form
vB/A ϭ vB Ϫ vA and aB/A ϭ aB Ϫ aA and
redraw the vector polygons to conform
with these alternative relations.
Caution: So far we are only prepared to
handle motion relative to nonrotating
axes. If we had attached the reference
axes rigidly to car B, they would rotate
with the car, and we would ﬁnd that the
velocity and acceleration terms relative
to the rotating axes are not the negative
of those measured from the nonrotating
axes moving with A. Rotating axes are
treated in Art. 5/7.

92

Chapter 2

Kinematics of Particles

PROBLEMS
Introductory Problems
2/183 Car A rounds a curve of 150-m radius at a constant
speed of 54 km/h. At the instant represented, car B
is moving at 81 km/h but is slowing down at the
rate of 3 m/s2. Determine the velocity and acceleration of car A as observed from car B.

2/185 The passenger aircraft B is ﬂying east with a velocity vB ϭ 800 km /h. A military jet traveling south
with a velocity vA ϭ 1200 km /h passes under B at a
slightly lower altitude. What velocity does A appear
to have to a passenger in B, and what is the direction of that apparent velocity?

N

x
A

y
A
y

vA

B

B

vB

150 m

x

Problem 2/183

Problem 2/185

2/184 For the instant represented, car A is rounding the
circular curve at a constant speed of 30 mi/hr, while
car B is slowing down at the rate of 5 mi/hr per second. Determine the magnitude of the acceleration
that car A appears to have to an observer in car B.

2/186 A marathon participant R is running north at a
speed vR ϭ 10 mi/hr. A wind is blowing in the direction shown at a speed vW ϭ 15 mi/hr. (a) Determine the velocity of the wind relative to the
runner. (b) Repeat for the case when the runner is
moving directly to the south at the same speed. Express all answers both in terms of the unit vectors
i and j and as magnitudes and compass directions.

500′
N

A
30°

35°
vR

B

vW
y

y
x

Problem 2/184

R
x

Problem 2/186

Article 2/8
2/187 A small aircraft A is about to land with an airspeed
of 80 mi/hr. If the aircraft is encountering a steady
side wind of speed vW ϭ 10 mi/hr as shown, at what
angle ␣ should the pilot direct the aircraft so that
the absolute velocity is parallel to the runway?
What is the speed at touchdown?

A

Problems

93

Representative Problems
2/189 A small ship capable of making a speed of 6 knots
through still water maintains a heading due east
while being set to the south by an ocean current.
The actual course of the boat is from A to B, a distance of 10 nautical miles that requires exactly
2 hours. Determine the speed vC of the current and
its direction measured clockwise from the north.

α

N(0°)
A
N

vW

E(90°)

10°

B
Problem 2/187

Problem 2/189

2/188 The car A has a forward speed of 18 km/h and is accelerating at 3 m/s2. Determine the velocity and acceleration of the car relative to observer B, who
rides in a nonrotating chair on the Ferris wheel.
The angular rate ⍀ ϭ 3 rev /min of the Ferris wheel
is constant.
Ω = 3 rev/min

2/190 Hockey player A carries the puck on his stick and
moves in the direction shown with a speed
vA ϭ 4 m /s. In passing the puck to his stationary
teammate B, by what angle ␣ should the direction
of his shot trail the line of sight if he launches the
puck with a speed of 7 m/s relative to himself?

y
B

B
x

45°
R=9m
α

A

45°
A

vA

Problem 2/188
Problem 2/190

94

Chapter 2

Kinematics of Particles

2/191 A ferry is moving due east and encounters a southwest wind of speed vW ϭ 10 m /s as shown. The experienced ferry captain wishes to minimize the
effects of the wind on the passengers who are
on the outdoor decks. At what speed vB should he
proceed?

B

vB

2/193 While scrambling directly toward the sideline at a
speed vQ ϭ 20 ft/sec, the football quarterback Q
throws a pass toward the stationary receiver R. At
what angle ␣ should the quarterback release the ball?
The speed of the ball relative to the quarterback is
60 ft/sec. Treat the problem as two-dimensional.

v

Q
α

40°

5 yd

vQ

vW

R

N
20 yd
Problem 2/193
Problem 2/191

2/192 A drop of water falls with no initial speed from
point A of a highway overpass. After dropping 6 m,
it strikes the windshield at point B of a car which is
traveling at a speed of 100 km/h on the horizontal
road. If the windshield is inclined 50° from the vertical as shown, determine the angle ␪ relative to the
normal n to the windshield at which the water drop
strikes.

2/194 The speedboat B is cruising to the north at 75 mi/hr
when it encounters an eastward current of speed
vC ϭ 10 mi/hr but does not change its heading
(relative to the water). Determine the subsequent
velocity of the boat relative to the wind and express
your result as a magnitude and compass direction.
The current affects the motion of the boat; the
southwesterly wind of speed vW ϭ 20 mi/hr does not.

N

30°

A

B
6m

vW

vC
t

50°

n
100 km / h

B
Problem 2/194
Problem 2/192

Article 2/8
2/195 Starting from the relative position shown, aircraft
B is to rendezvous with the refueling tanker A. If B
is to arrive in close proximity to A in a two-minute
time interval, what absolute velocity vector should
B acquire and maintain? The velocity of the tanker
A is 300 mi/hr along the constant-altitude path
shown.

Problems

2/198 The spacecraft S approaches the planet Mars along
a trajectory b-b in the orbital plane of Mars with an
absolute velocity of 19 km/s. Mars has a velocity of
24.1 km/s along its trajectory a-a. Determine the
angle ␤ between the line of sight S-M and the trajectory b-b when Mars appears from the spacecraft
to be approaching it head on.

10,000′
b
a

M

24.1 km /s

a

15°

A

y

2000′

β

19 k

m /s

x

B

95

S

b

Problem 2/195

2/196 Airplane A is ﬂying horizontally with a constant
speed of 200 km/h and is towing the glider B, which
is gaining altitude. If the tow cable has a length
r ϭ 60 m and ␪ is increasing at the constant rate of
5 degrees per second, determine the magnitudes of
the velocity v and acceleration a of the glider for
the instant when ␪ ϭ 15Њ.

Problem 2/198

2/199 Two ships A and B are moving with constant
speeds vA and vB, respectively, along straight intersecting courses. The navigator of ship B notes the
time rates of change of the separation distance r
between the ships and the bearing angle ␪. Show
˙
¨
that ␪ ϭ Ϫ2r ␪ /r and ¨ ϭ r␪ 2.
r
˙˙

B
r

vA
vA

θ
A
Problem 2/196

2/197 If the airplane in Prob. 2/196 is increasing its speed
in level ﬂight at the rate of 5 km/h each second and
is unreeling the glider tow cable at the constant
rate ˙ ϭ 2 m /s while ␪ remains constant, determine
r
the magnitude of the acceleration of the glider B.

A
r

θ
vB
B

Problem 2/199

96

Chapter 2

Kinematics of Particles

2/200 Airplane A is ﬂying north with a constant horizontal velocity of 500 km/h. Airplane B is ﬂying southwest at the same altitude with a velocity of 500 km/h.
From the frame of reference of A, determine the
magnitude vr of the apparent or relative velocity of
B. Also ﬁnd the magnitude of the apparent velocity
vn with which B appears to be moving sideways or
normal to its centerline. Would the results be different if the two airplanes were ﬂying at different
but constant altitudes?

2/202 The shuttle orbiter A is in a circular orbit of altitude 200 mi, while spacecraft B is in a geosynchronous circular orbit of altitude 22,300 mi. Determine
the acceleration of B relative to a nonrotating
observer in the shuttle A. Use g0 ϭ 32.23 ft /sec2
for the surface-level gravitational acceleration and
R ϭ 3959 mi for the radius of the earth.
y

vA
N
A
A
x

B
200 mi
22,300 mi
B
vB
45°
Problem 2/202

Problem 2/200

2/201 In Prob. 2/200 if aircraft A is accelerating in its
northward direction at the rate of 3 km/h each second while aircraft B is slowing down at the rate of
4 km/h each second in its southwesterly direction,
determine the acceleration in m/s2 which B appears
to have to an observer in A and specify its direction
(␤) measured clockwise from the north.

2/203 After starting from the position marked with the
“x”, a football receiver B runs the slant-in pattern
shown, making a cut at P and thereafter running
with a constant speed vB ϭ 7 yd/sec in the direction
shown. The quarterback releases the ball with a
horizontal velocity of 100 ft/sec at the instant the
receiver passes point P. Determine the angle ␣ at
which the quarterback must throw the ball,
and the velocity of the ball relative to the receiver
when the ball is caught. Neglect any vertical motion of the ball.
y
15 yd
P

B
30°
15 yd
vB
vA
A

α

Q
Problem 2/203

x

Article 2/8
᭤ 2/204 The aircraft A with radar detection equipment is
ﬂying horizontally at an altitude of 12 km and is increasing its speed at the rate of 1.2 m/s each second. Its radar locks onto an aircraft B ﬂying in the
same direction and in the same vertical plane at an
altitude of 18 km. If A has a speed of 1000 km/h at
the instant when ␪ ϭ 30Њ, determine the values of ¨
r
¨
and ␪ at this same instant if B has a constant
speed of 1500 km/h.
B

18 km

Problems

97

᭤2/206 A batter hits the baseball A with an initial velocity
of v0 ϭ 100 ft /sec directly toward ﬁelder B at an
angle of 30° to the horizontal; the initial position of
the ball is 3 ft above ground level. Fielder B requires 1 sec to judge where the ball should be
4
caught and begins moving to that position with
constant speed. Because of great experience, ﬁelder
B chooses his running speed so that he arrives at
the “catch position” simultaneously with the baseball. The catch position is the ﬁeld location at
which the ball altitude is 7 ft. Determine the velocity of the ball relative to the ﬁelder at the instant
the catch is made.

r

y
A

θ

12 km

x

v0
30°

A

B

3′
Problem 2/204
220′

᭤2/205 At a certain instant after jumping from the airplane A, a skydiver B is in the position shown
and has reached a terminal (constant) speed
vB ϭ 50 m /s. The airplane has the same constant
speed vA ϭ 50 m/s, and after a period of level ﬂight
is just beginning to follow the circular path shown
of radius ␳A ϭ 2000 m. (a) Determine the velocity
and acceleration of the airplane relative to the skydiver. (b) Determine the time rate of change of the
speed vr of the airplane and the radius of curvature
␳r of its path, both as observed by the nonrotating
skydiver.

ρA = 2000 m
500 m

A
vA

r

350 m

y
B

x

vB
Problem 2/205

Problem 2/206

98

Chapter 2

Kinematics of Particles

2/9

Constrained Motion of Connected Particles

Sometimes the motions of particles are interrelated because of the
constraints imposed by interconnecting members. In such cases it is
necessary to account for these constraints in order to determine the respective motions of the particles.

x
r2

A

b

y
A′

B′

r1
C

One Degree of Freedom
Consider ﬁrst the very simple system of two interconnected particles A and B shown in Fig. 2/19. It should be quite evident by inspection that the horizontal motion of A is twice the vertical motion of B.
Nevertheless we will use this example to illustrate the method of analysis which applies to more complex situations where the results cannot
be easily obtained by inspection. The motion of B is clearly the same as
that of the center of its pulley, so we establish position coordinates y
and x measured from a convenient ﬁxed datum. The total length of the
cable is
␲r2
ϩ 2y ϩ ␲r1 ϩ b
Lϭxϩ
2

B

Figure 2/19

With L, r2, r1, and b all constant, the ﬁrst and second time derivatives of
the equation give
0 ϭ ˙ ϩ 2y
x
˙

or

0 ϭ vA ϩ 2vB

0 ϭ ¨ ϩ 2y
x
¨

or

0 ϭ aA ϩ 2aB

The velocity and acceleration constraint equations indicate that, for
the coordinates selected, the velocity of A must have a sign which is opposite to that of the velocity of B, and similarly for the accelerations.
The constraint equations are valid for the motion of the system in either
x
direction. We emphasize that vA ϭ ˙ is positive to the left and that vB ϭ ˙
y
is positive down.
Because the results do not depend on the lengths or pulley radii, we
should be able to analyze the motion without considering them. In the
lower-left portion of Fig. 2/19 is shown an enlarged view of the horizontal diameter AЈBЈCЈ of the lower pulley at an instant of time. Clearly,
AЈ and A have the same motion magnitudes, as do B and BЈ. During an
inﬁnitesimal motion of AЈ, it is easy to see from the triangle that BЈ
moves half as far as AЈ because point C as a point on the ﬁxed portion
of the cable momentarily has no motion. Thus, with differentiation by
time in mind, we can obtain the velocity and acceleration magnitude relationships by inspection. The pulley, in effect, is a wheel which rolls on
the ﬁxed vertical cable. (The kinematics of a rolling wheel will be
treated more extensively in Chapter 5 on rigid-body motion.) The system of Fig. 2/19 is said to have one degree of freedom since only one
variable, either x or y, is needed to specify the positions of all parts of
the system.

Article 2/9

Constrained Motion of Connected Particles

Two Degrees of Freedom
The system with two degrees of freedom is shown in Fig. 2/20. Here
the positions of the lower cylinder and pulley C depend on the separate
speciﬁcations of the two coordinates yA and yB. The lengths of the cables
attached to cylinders A and B can be written, respectively, as

yA

yB
A

LA ϭ yA ϩ 2yD ϩ constant

yC

B
D

LB ϭ yB ϩ yC ϩ (yC Ϫ yD) ϩ constant
C

and their time derivatives are
0 ϭ ˙A ϩ 2y D
y
˙

and

0 ϭ ˙B ϩ 2y C Ϫ ˙D
y
y
˙

0 ϭ ¨A ϩ 2y D
y
¨

and

0 ϭ ¨B ϩ 2y C Ϫ ¨D
y
y
¨

y
y
Eliminating the terms in ˙D and ¨D gives

Figure 2/20

y
˙A ϩ 2y B ϩ 4y C ϭ 0
˙
˙

or

vA ϩ 2vB ϩ 4vC ϭ 0

y
¨A ϩ 2y B ϩ 4y C ϭ 0
¨
¨

or

aA ϩ 2aB ϩ 4aC ϭ 0

It is clearly impossible for the signs of all three terms to be positive simultaneously. So, for example, if both A and B have downward (positive) velocities, then C will have an upward (negative) velocity.
These results can also be found by inspection of the motions of the
two pulleys at C and D. For an increment dyA (with yB held ﬁxed), the
center of D moves up an amount dyA/2, which causes an upward movement dyA/4 of the center of C. For an increment dyB (with yA held ﬁxed),
the center of C moves up a distance dyB/2. A combination of the two
movements gives an upward movement
ϪdyC ϭ

dyA dyB
ϩ
2
4

so that ϪvC ϭ vA/4 ϩ vB/2 as before. Visualization of the actual geometry
of the motion is an important ability.
A second type of constraint where the direction of the connecting
member changes with the motion is illustrated in the second of the two
sample problems which follow.

99

yD

100

Chapter 2

Kinematics of Particles

SAMPLE PROBLEM 2/15
In the pulley conﬁguration shown, cylinder A has a downward velocity of 0.3
m/s. Determine the velocity of B. Solve in two ways.
yA

C

Solution (I).

The centers of the pulleys at A and B are located by the coordinates yA and yB measured from ﬁxed positions. The total constant length of cable
in the pulley system is

yB

L ϭ 3yB ϩ 2yA ϩ constants
A

where the constants account for the ﬁxed lengths of cable in contact with the cir-

ᕡ cumferences of the pulleys and the constant vertical separation between the two
upper left-hand pulleys. Differentiation with time gives

B

0 ϭ 3y B ϩ 2y A
˙
˙
Substitution of vA ϭ ˙A ϭ 0.3 m/s and vB ϭ ˙B gives
y
y

ᕢ

0 ϭ 3(vB) ϩ 2(0.3)

vB ϭ Ϫ0.2 m/s

or

dsB
dsB

Ans.
(a)

Solution (II).

An enlarged diagram of the pulleys at A, B, and C is shown.
During a differential movement dsA of the center of pulley A, the left end of its
horizontal diameter has no motion since it is attached to the ﬁxed part of the
cable. Therefore, the right-hand end has a movement of 2dsA as shown. This
movement is transmitted to the left-hand end of the horizontal diameter of the
pulley at B. Further, from pulley C with its ﬁxed center, we see that the displacements on each side are equal and opposite. Thus, for pulley B, the right-hand
end of the diameter has a downward displacement equal to the upward displacement dsB of its center. By inspection of the geometry, we conclude that
2dsA ϭ 3dsB

or

dsA

dsB
dsB

2dsA

(c)

(b)

Helpful Hints

ᕡ We neglect the small angularity of

dsB ϭ 2dsA
3

the cables between B and C.

Dividing by dt gives
͉vB ͉ ϭ 2 vA ϭ 2 (0.3) ϭ 0.2 m/s (upward)
3
3

2dsA

Ans.

ᕢ The negative sign indicates that the
velocity of B is upward.

SAMPLE PROBLEM 2/16
The tractor A is used to hoist the bale B with the pulley arrangement
shown. If A has a forward velocity vA, determine an expression for the upward
velocity vB of the bale in terms of x.

Solution.

We designate the position of the tractor by the coordinate x and the
position of the bale by the coordinate y, both measured from a ﬁxed reference.
The total constant length of the cable is

l

h

y

L ϭ 2(h Ϫ y) ϩ l ϭ 2(h Ϫ y) ϩ Ίh2 ϩ x2

B
A

ᕡ Differentiation with time yields
0 ϭ Ϫ2y ϩ
˙

xx
˙

x

Ίh2 ϩ x2

Substituting vA ϭ ˙ and vB ϭ ˙ gives
x
y
vB ϭ

Helpful Hint
xvA
1
2 Ίh2 ϩ x2

Ans.

ᕡ Differentiation of the relation for a
right triangle occurs frequently in
mechanics.

Article 2/9

Problems

101

2/209 Cylinder B has a downward velocity in feet per second given by vB ϭ t2 /2 ϩ t3 /6, where t is in seconds.
Calculate the acceleration of A when t ϭ 2 sec.

PROBLEMS
Introductory Problems
2/207 If block B has a leftward velocity of 1.2 m/s, determine the velocity of cylinder A.

B

B

A
A
Problem 2/207
Problem 2/209

2/208 At a certain instant, the velocity of cylinder B is
1.2 m/s down and its acceleration is 2 m/s2 up.
Determine the corresponding velocity and acceleration of block A.

2/210 Determine the constraint equation which relates
the accelerations of bodies A and B. Assume that
the upper surface of A remains horizontal.

A

A
B

B

Problem 2/208

Problem 2/210

102

Chapter 2

Kinematics of Particles

2/211 Determine the vertical rise h of the load W during
5 seconds if the hoisting drum wraps cable around
it at the constant rate of 320 mm/s.

2/213 For the pulley system shown, each of the cables at
A and B is given a velocity of 2 m/s in the direction
of the arrow. Determine the upward velocity v of
the load m.
B

A

m
W

Problem 2/211

2/212 A truck equipped with a power winch on its front
end pulls itself up a steep incline with the cable and
pulley arrangement shown. If the cable is wound
up on the drum at the constant rate of 40 mm/s,
how long does it take for the truck to move 4 m up
the incline?

Problem 2/213

Representative Problems
2/214 Determine the relationship which governs the
velocities of the two cylinders A and B. Express all
velocities as positive down. How many degrees of
freedom are present?

A
B

Problem 2/212

Problem 2/214

Article 2/9
2/215 The pulley system of the previous problem is modiﬁed as shown with the addition of a fourth pulley
and a third cylinder C. Determine the relationship
which governs the velocities of the three cylinders,
and state the number of degrees of freedom.
Express all velocities as positive down.

Problems

103

2/217 Determine an expression for the velocity vA of the
cart A down the incline in terms of the upward
velocity vB of cylinder B.

x

C
h

A

C

B
A
B
Problem 2/217
Problem 2/215

2/216 Neglect the diameters of the small pulleys and
establish the relationship between the velocity of A
and the velocity of B for a given value of y.
b

2/218 Under the action of force P, the constant acceleration of block B is 6 ft/sec2 up the incline. For the instant when the velocity of B is 3 ft/sec up the
incline, determine the velocity of B relative to A,
the acceleration of B relative to A, and the absolute
velocity of point C of the cable.

b
P

B

y
C
A

A

20°

B
Problem 2/218
Problem 2/216

104

Chapter 2

Kinematics of Particles

2/219 The small sliders A and B are connected by the
rigid slender rod. If the velocity of slider B is 2 m/s
to the right and is constant over a certain interval
of time, determine the speed of slider A when the
system is in the position shown.

2/221 Collars A and B slide along the ﬁxed right-angle
rods and are connected by a cord of length L.
Determine the acceleration ax of collar B as a
function of y if collar A is given a constant upward
velocity vA.
y

R

60°

A
2R
vB

A

B

L

y
Problem 2/219

B
x

2/220 The power winches on the industrial scaffold enable it to be raised or lowered. For rotation in the
senses indicated, the scaffold is being raised. If each
drum has a diameter of 200 mm and turns at the
rate of 40 rev/min. determine the upward velocity v
of the scaffold.

Problem 2/221

2/222 Collars A and B slide along the ﬁxed rods and are
connected by a cord of length L. If collar A has a
x
velocity vA ϭ ˙ to the right, express the velocity
vB ϭ Ϫs of B in terms of x, vA, and s.
˙

B
L
A

45°
s
x
Problem 2/220

Problem 2/222

Article 2/9
2/223 The particle A is mounted on a light rod pivoted at
O and therefore is constrained to move in a circular
arc of radius r. Determine the velocity of A in terms
of the downward velocity vB of the counterweight
for any angle ␪.
y

Problems

᭤2/225 With all conditions of Prob. 2/224 remaining the
same, determine the acceleration of slider B at the
instant when sA ϭ 425 mm.
᭤2/226 Neglect the diameter of the small pulley attached
to body A and determine the magnitude of the total
velocity of B in terms of the velocity vA which body
A has to the right. Assume that the cable between
B and the pulley remains vertical and solve for a
given value of x.
x

r

h

A
A
r

B

O

θ

x

B
Problem 2/226

Problem 2/223

2/224 The rod of the ﬁxed hydraulic cylinder is moving to
the left with a constant speed vA ϭ 25 mm/s.
Determine the corresponding velocity of slider B
when sA ϭ 425 mm. The length of the cord is
1050 mm, and the effects of the radius of the small
pulley A may be neglected.
sA
C
250 mm

vA
A

B

Problem 2/224

105

106

Chapter 2

Kinematics of Particles

2/10

Chapter Review

In Chapter 2 we have developed and illustrated the basic methods
for describing particle motion. The concepts developed in this chapter
form the basis for much of dynamics, and it is important to review and
master this material before proceeding to the following chapters.
By far the most important concept in Chapter 2 is the time derivative of a vector. The time derivative of a vector depends on direction
change as well as magnitude change. As we proceed in our study of dynamics, we will need to examine the time derivatives of vectors other
than position and velocity vectors, and the principles and procedures developed in Chapter 2 will be useful for this purpose.

Categories of Motion
The following categories of motion have been examined in this
chapter:
1. Rectilinear motion (one coordinate)
2. Plane curvilinear motion (two coordinates)
3. Space curvilinear motion (three coordinates)
In general, the geometry of a given problem enables us to identify the
category readily. One exception to this categorization is encountered
when only the magnitudes of the motion quantities measured along the
path are of interest. In this event, we can use the single distance coordinate measured along the curved path, together with its scalar time des
s
rivatives giving the speed ͉ ˙ ͉ and the tangential acceleration ¨.
Plane motion is easier to generate and control, particularly in machinery, than space motion, and thus a large fraction of our motion
problems come under the plane curvilinear or rectilinear categories.

Use of Fixed Axes
We commonly describe motion or make motion measurements with
respect to ﬁxed reference axes (absolute motion) and moving axes (relative motion). The acceptable choice of the ﬁxed axes depends on the
problem. Axes attached to the surface of the earth are sufﬁciently “ﬁxed”
for most engineering problems, although important exceptions include
earth–satellite and interplanetary motion, accurate projectile trajectories, navigation, and other problems. The equations of relative motion
discussed in Chapter 2 are restricted to translating reference axes.
Choice of Coordinates
The choice of coordinates is of prime importance. We have developed the description of motion using the following coordinates:
1. Rectangular (Cartesian) coordinates (x-y) and (x-y-z)
2. Normal and tangential coordinates (n-t)
3. Polar coordinates (r-␪)

Article 2/10

4. Cylindrical coordinates (r-␪-z)

Chapter Review

107

y

5. Spherical coordinates (R-␪-␾)
Path

When the coordinates are not speciﬁed, the appropriate choice usually
depends on how the motion is generated or measured. Thus, for a particle which slides radially along a rotating rod, polar coordinates are the
natural ones to use. Radar tracking calls for polar or spherical coordinates. When measurements are made along a curved path, normal and
tangential coordinates are indicated. An x-y plotter clearly involves rectangular coordinates.
Figure 2/21 is a composite representation of the x-y, n-t, and r-␪ coordinate descriptions of the velocity v and acceleration a for curvilinear
motion in a plane. It is frequently essential to transpose motion description from one set of coordinates to another, and Fig. 2/21 contains the
information necessary for that transition.

t

θ

v

vy

r

n
vr

vθ
x

vx
y

r

θ
·
vx = x
vn = 0
·
vr = r

x

·
vy = y
vt = v
·
vθ = rθ

(a) Velocity components

Approximations
Making appropriate approximations is one of the most important
abilities you can acquire. The assumption of constant acceleration is
valid when the forces which cause the acceleration do not vary appreciably. When motion data are acquired experimentally, we must utilize the
nonexact data to acquire the best possible description, often with the aid
of graphical or numerical approximations.

y
Path

θ

a

ay
aθ

n

t

at
r

Choice of Mathematical Method
We frequently have a choice of solution using scalar algebra, vector
algebra, trigonometric geometry, or graphical geometry. All of these
methods have been illustrated, and all are important to learn. The choice
of method will depend on the geometry of the problem, how the motion
data are given, and the accuracy desired. Mechanics by its very nature is
geometric, so you are encouraged to develop facility in sketching vector
relationships, both as an aid to the disclosure of appropriate geometric
and trigonometric relations and as a means of solving vector equations
graphically. Geometric portrayal is the most direct representation of the
vast majority of mechanics problems.

an

ar

x
r

ax
y

θ
ax = ··
x
an = v2/ρ
·
ar = ·· – rθ 2
r

ay = ··
y
·
at = v
··
··
aθ = rθ + 2rθ

(b) Acceleration components

Figure 2/21

x

108

Chapter 2

Kinematics of Particles

REVIEW PROBLEMS
2/227 The position s of a particle along a straight line is
given by s ϭ 8eϪ0.4t Ϫ 6t ϩ t2, where s is in meters
and t is the time in seconds. Determine the velocity
v when the acceleration is 3 m/s2.
2/228 While scrambling directly toward the sideline, the
football quarterback Q throws a pass toward
the stationary receiver R. At what speed vQ should
the quarterback run if the direction of the velocity
of the ball relative to the quarterback is to be directly down the ﬁeld as indicated? The speed of the
ball relative to the quarterback is 60 ft/sec. What is
the absolute speed of the ball? Treat the problem as
two-dimensional.

Q
v
5 yd

vQ

R

2/230 At time t ϭ 0 a small ball is projected from point A
with a velocity of 200 ft/sec at the 60Њ angle. Neglect atmospheric resistance and determine the two
times t1 and t2 when the velocity of the ball makes
an angle of 45Њ with the horizontal x-axis.
u = 200 ft/sec

A 60°

x

Problem 2/230

2/231 The third stage of a rocket is injected by its booster
with a velocity u of 15 000 km/h at A into an unpowered coasting ﬂight to B. At B its rocket motor
is ignited when the trajectory makes an angle of 20Њ
with the horizontal. Operation is effectively above
the atmosphere, and the gravitational acceleration
during this interval may be taken as 9 m/s2, constant in magnitude and direction. Determine the
time t to go from A to B. (This quantity is needed in
the design of the ignition control system.) Also determine the corresponding increase h in altitude.
B

20 yd

20°
Horiz.

y
Problem 2/228

2/229 A golfer is out of bounds and in a gulley. For the
initial conditions shown, determine the coordinates
of the point of ﬁrst impact of the golf ball. The camera platform B is in the plane of the trajectory.
y

u
A

45°

Horiz.

105 ft /sec
40′

A

20′

B

40°
x
60′

10′ 20′

Problem 2/229

210′

Problem 2/231

x

Article 2/10
2/232 The small cylinder is made to move along the rotating rod with a motion between r ϭ r0 ϩ b and
2␲t
r ϭ r0 Ϫ b given by r ϭ r0 ϩ b sin ␶ , where t is the
time counted from the instant the cylinder passes
the position r ϭ r0 and ␶ is the period of the oscillation (time for one complete oscillation). Simultaneously, the rod rotates about the vertical at the
˙
constant angular rate ␪ . Determine the value of r
for which the radial (r-direction) acceleration is
zero.
·

b

v0 = 100 ft/sec
θ = 20°

v

6′

(a)

b

109

2/234 In case (a), the baseball player stands relatively
stationary and throws the ball with the initial conditions shown. In case (b), he runs with speed
v ϭ 15 ft/sec as he launches the ball with the same
conditions relative to himself. What is the additional range of the ball in case (b)? Compare the
two ﬂight times.

r

r0

Review Problems

(b)
Problem 2/234

Problem 2/232

2/233 Rotation of the arm PO is controlled by the horizontal motion of the vertical slotted link. If ˙ ϭ 4
x
ft/sec and ¨ ϭ 30 ft/sec2 when x ϭ 2 in., determine
x
˙
¨
␪ and ␪ for this instant.

2/235 A small projectile is ﬁred from point O with an initial velocity u ϭ 500 m/s at the angle of 60Њ from
the horizontal as shown. Neglect atmospheric resistance and any change in g and compute the radius
of curvature ␳ of the path of the projectile 30 seconds after the ﬁring.

x
A
u = 500 m/s
P

θ

Problem 2/233

θ = 60°

Problem 2/235
4″

O

O

110

Chapter 2

Kinematics of Particles

2/236 The motion of pin P is controlled by the two moving slots A and B in which the pin slides. If B has a
velocity vB ϭ 3 m /s to the right while A has an
upward velocity vA ϭ 2 m/s, determine the magnitude vP of the velocity of the pin.

B

2/238 For the instant represented the particle P has a
velocity v ϭ 6 ft/sec in the direction shown and
has acceleration components ax ϭ 15 ft /sec2 and
a␪ ϭ Ϫ15 ft/sec2. Determine ar, ay, at, an, and the radius of curvature ␳ of the path for this position.
(Hint: Draw the related acceleration components of
the total acceleration of the particle and take advantage of the simpliﬁed geometry for your calculations.)

60°
t
P
θ

vA
A

v
r

y

30°
P
r=

vB

θ = 30°

Problem 2/236

2/237 The angular displacement of the centrifuge is given
by ␪ ϭ 4[t ϩ 30eϪ0.03t Ϫ 30] rad, where t is in seconds and t ϭ 0 is the startup time. If the person
loses consciousness at an acceleration level of 10g,
determine the time t at which this would occur.
Verify that the tangential acceleration is negligible
as the normal acceleration approaches 10g.

30′

θ
O

3′

x

Problem 2/238

2/239 As part of a training exercise, the pilot of aircraft A
adjusts her airspeed (speed relative to the wind) to
220 km/h while in the level portion of the approach
path and thereafter holds her absolute speed constant as she negotiates the 10Њ glide path. The absolute speed of the aircraft carrier is 30 km/h and
that of the wind is 48 km/h. What will be the angle
␤ of the glide path with respect to the horizontal as
seen by an observer on the ship?

10°

30 km/h

Problem 2/239
Problem 2/237

48 km/h
C

A

Article 2/10
2/240 A small aircraft is moving in a horizontal circle
with a constant speed of 130 ft/sec. At the instant
represented, a small package A is ejected from the
right side of the aircraft with a horizontal velocity
of 20 ft/sec relative to the aircraft. Neglect aerodynamic effects and calculate the coordinates of the
point of impact on the ground.
z

Review Problems

111

2/242 Particle P moves along the curved path shown. At
the instant represented, r ϭ 2 m, ␪ ϭ 30Њ, and the
velocity v makes an angle ␤ ϭ 60Њ with the horizontal x-axis and has a magnitude of 3.2 m/s. If the
y- and r-components of the acceleration of P are
5 m/s2 and Ϫ1.83 m/s2, respectively, at this position, determine the corresponding radius of curvature ␳ of the path and the x-component of the
acceleration of the particle. Solve graphically or analytically.
y

1000′
v

A

β

P
1500′

r

O

θ

x

x
y
Problem 2/242

Problem 2/240

2/241 Car A negotiates a curve of 60-m radius at a constant speed of 50 km/h. When A passes the position
shown, car B is 30 m from the intersection and is
accelerating south toward the intersection at the
rate of 1.5 m/s2. Determine the acceleration which
A appears to have when observed by an occupant of
B at this instant.

2/243 At the instant depicted, assume that the particle P,
which moves on a curved path, is 80 m from the
pole O and has the velocity v and acceleration a as
indicated. Determine the instantaneous values of ˙,
r
r ˙ ¨
¨, ␪ , ␪ , the n- and t-components of acceleration,
and the radius of curvature ␳.
θ

v = 30 m/s
r
30°

a = 8 m /s2

30°

N

60°

m
60

30°

r=

B
O

30 m

80

m

θ

A
Problem 2/243

Problem 2/241

P

112

Chapter 2

Kinematics of Particles

᭤ 2/244 The radar tracking antenna oscillates about its
vertical axis according to ␪ ϭ ␪0 cos ␻t, where ␻ is
the constant circular frequency and 2␪0 is the double amplitude of oscillation. Simultaneously, the
angle of elevation ␾ is increasing at the constant
˙
rate ␾ ϭ K. Determine the expression for the magnitude a of the acceleration of the signal horn (a) as
it passes position A and (b) as it passes the top position B, assuming that ␪ ϭ 0 at this instant.
B
z

θ

A

b

φ

2θ 0

Problem 2/244

2/245 The rod of the ﬁxed hydraulic cylinder is moving to
the left with a constant speed vA ϭ 25 mm /s.
Determine the corresponding velocity of slider
B when sA ϭ 425 mm. The length of the cord is
1600 mm, and the effects of the radius of the small
pulley at A may be neglected.
sA
C
250 mm

vA
A

B

Problem 2/245

*Computer-Oriented Problems
* 2/246 With all conditions of Prob. 2/245 remaining the
same, determine the acceleration of slider B at the
instant when sA ϭ 425 mm.
* 2/247 Two particles A and B start from rest at x ϭ 0 and
move along parallel paths according to xA ϭ
␲t
and xB ϭ 0.08t, where xA and xB are in
0.16 sin
2
meters and t is in seconds counted from the start.
Determine the time t (where t Ͼ 0) when both particles have the same displacement and calculate
this displacement x.
* 2/248 A baseball is dropped from an altitude h ϭ 200 ft
and is found to be traveling at 85 ft/sec when it
strikes the ground. In addition to gravitational
acceleration, which may be assumed constant, air
resistance causes a deceleration component of magnitude kv2, where v is the speed and k is a constant.
Determine the value of the coefﬁcient k. Plot the
speed of the baseball as a function of altitude y. If
the baseball were dropped from a high altitude, but
one at which g may still be assumed constant, what
would be the terminal velocity vt? (The terminal velocity is that speed at which the acceleration of
gravity and that due to air resistance are equal and
opposite, so that the baseball drops at a constant
speed.) If the baseball were dropped from
h ϭ 200 ft, at what speed vЈ would it strike the
ground if air resistance were neglected?

Article 2/10
* 2/249 The slotted arm is ﬁxed and the four-lobe cam
rotates counterclockwise at the constant speed of
2 revolutions per second. The distance r ϭ 80 ϩ
12 cos 4␪, where r is millimeters and ␪ is in radians.
Plot the radial velocity vr and the radial acceleration ar of pin P versus ␪ from ␪ ϭ 0 to ␪ ϭ ␲/2.
State the acceleration of pin P for (a) ␪ ϭ 0,
(b) ␪ ϭ ␲/8, and (c) ␪ ϭ ␲ /4.
θ

P

Review Problems

113

* 2/251 A low-ﬂying cropduster A is moving with a constant speed of 40 m/s in the horizontal circle of radius 300 m. As it passes the twelve-o’clock position
shown at time t ϭ 0, car B starts from rest from the
position shown and accelerates along the straight
road at the constant rate of 3 m/s2 until it reaches
a speed of 30 m/s, after which it maintains that
constant speed. Determine the velocity and acceleration of A with respect to B and plot the magnitudes of both these quantities over the time period
0 Յ t Յ 50 s as functions of both time and displacement sB of the car. Determine the maximum and
minimum values of both quantities and state the
values of the time t and the displacement sB at
which they occur.

r
A
O
300 m
y
350 m

x
Problem 2/249
B

* 2/250 At time t ϭ 0, the 1.8-lb particle P is given an initial velocity v0 ϭ 1 ft/sec at the position ␪ ϭ 0 and
subsequently slides along the circular path of radius r ϭ 1.5 ft. Because of the viscous ﬂuid and the
effect of gravitational acceleration, the tangential
k
acceleration is at ϭ g cos ␪ Ϫ m v, where the constant k ϭ 0.2 lb-sec /ft is a drag parameter. Deter˙
mine and plot both ␪ and ␪ as functions of the time
t over the range 0 Յ t Յ 5 sec. Determine the maxi˙
mum values of ␪ and ␪ and the corresponding values of t. Also determine the ﬁrst time at which
␪ ϭ 90Њ.

1000 m
sB

Problem 2/251

* 2/252 A projectile is launched from point A with speed
v0 ϭ 30 m /s. Determine the value of the launch
angle ␣ which maximizes the range R indicated in
the ﬁgure. Determine the corresponding value R.
v0 = 30 m/s

O
A

α
10 m

r
P
50 m

R
Problem 2/252

Problem 2/250

B

114

Chapter 2

Kinematics of Particles

* 2/253 By means of the control unit M, the pendulum OA
is given an oscillatory motion about the vertical
g
given by ␪ ϭ ␪0 sin
t, where ␪0 is the maximum
l
angular displacement in radians, g is the acceleration of gravity, l is the pendulum length, and t is
the time in seconds measured from an instant
when OA is vertical. Determine and plot the magnitude a of the acceleration of A as a function of time
and as a function of ␪ over the ﬁrst quarter cycle of
motion. Determine the minimum and maximum
values of a and the corresponding values of t and ␪.
Use the values ␪0 ϭ ␲ /3 radians, l ϭ 0.8 m, and
g ϭ 9.81 m/s2. (Note: The prescribed motion is not
precisely that of a freely swinging pendulum for
large amplitudes.)

Ί

*2/254 The guide with the vertical slot is given a horizontal oscillatory motion according to x ϭ 4 sin 2t,
where x is in inches and t is in seconds. The oscillation causes the pin P to move in the ﬁxed parabolic
slot whose shape is given by y ϭ x2 /4, with y also
in inches. Plot the magnitude v of the velocity of
the pin as a function of time during the interval
required for pin P to go from the center to the
extremity x ϭ 4 in. Find and locate the maximum
value of v and verify your results analytically.
y
x

P
O

l

M

x

θ

Problem 2/254
A

Problem 2/253

The designers of amusement-park rides such as this roller coaster must not rely upon the principles of equilibrium alone as they develop specifications for the cars and the supporting structure. The particle kinetics of each
car must be considered in estimating the involved forces so that a safe system can be designed.
Jupiterimages/GettyImages

3

Kinetics of
Particles
CHAPTER OUTLINE
3/1 Introduction

Section D Special Applications

Section A Force, Mass, and Acceleration

3/11 Introduction

3/2 Newton’s Second Law

3/12 Impact

3/3 Equation of Motion and Solution of Problems

3/13 Central-Force Motion

3/4 Rectilinear Motion

3/14 Relative Motion

3/5 Curvilinear Motion

3/15 Chapter Review

Section B Work and Energy
3/6 Work and Kinetic Energy
3/7 Potential Energy
Section C Impulse and Momentum
3/8 Introduction
3/9 Linear Impulse and Linear Momentum
3/10 Angular Impulse and Angular Momentum

3/1

Introduction

According to Newton’s second law, a particle will accelerate when it is
subjected to unbalanced forces. Kinetics is the study of the relations
between unbalanced forces and the resulting changes in motion. In
Chapter 3 we will study the kinetics of particles. This topic requires that
we combine our knowledge of the properties of forces, which we developed
in statics, and the kinematics of particle motion just covered in Chapter 2.
With the aid of Newton’s second law, we can combine these two topics
and solve engineering problems involving force, mass, and motion.
The three general approaches to the solution of kinetics problems
are: (A) direct application of Newton’s second law (called the forcemass-acceleration method), (B) use of work and energy principles, and
117

118

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

(C) solution by impulse and momentum methods. Each approach has its
special characteristics and advantages, and Chapter 3 is subdivided into
Sections A, B, and C, according to these three methods of solution. In
addition, a fourth section, Section D, treats special applications and
combinations of the three basic approaches. Before proceeding, you
should review carefully the deﬁnitions and concepts of Chapter 1, because they are fundamental to the developments which follow.

SECTION A FORCE, MASS, AND ACCELERATION
3/2

Newton’s Second Law

The basic relation between force and acceleration is found in Newton’s second law, Eq. 1/1, the veriﬁcation of which is entirely experimental. We now describe the fundamental meaning of this law by
considering an ideal experiment in which force and acceleration are assumed to be measured without error. We subject a mass particle to the
action of a single force F1, and we measure the acceleration a1 of the
particle in the primary inertial system.* The ratio F1/a1 of the magnitudes of the force and the acceleration will be some number C1 whose
value depends on the units used for measurement of force and acceleration. We then repeat the experiment by subjecting the same particle to
a different force F2 and measuring the corresponding acceleration a2.
The ratio F2 /a2 of the magnitudes will again produce a number C2. The
experiment is repeated as many times as desired.
We draw two important conclusions from the results of these experiments. First, the ratios of applied force to corresponding acceleration
all equal the same number, provided the units used for measurement
are not changed in the experiments. Thus,
F1 F2
F
ϭ
ϭ ⅐ ⅐ ⅐ ϭ ϭ C,
a1
a2
a

a constant

We conclude that the constant C is a measure of some invariable
property of the particle. This property is the inertia of the particle,
which is its resistance to rate of change of velocity. For a particle of high
inertia (large C), the acceleration will be small for a given force F. On
the other hand, if the inertia is small, the acceleration will be large. The
mass m is used as a quantitative measure of inertia, and therefore, we
may write the expression C ϭ km, where k is a constant introduced to
account for the units used. Thus, we may express the relation obtained
from the experiments as
F ϭ kma

(3/1)

*The primary inertial system or astronomical frame of reference is an imaginary set of reference axes which are assumed to have no translation or rotation in space. See Art. 1/2,
Chapter 1.

Article 3/2

where F is the magnitude of the resultant force acting on the particle
of mass m, and a is the magnitude of the resulting acceleration of the
particle.
The second conclusion we draw from this ideal experiment is that
the acceleration is always in the direction of the applied force. Thus,
Eq. 3/1 becomes a vector relation and may be written
F ϭ kma

(3/2)

Although an actual experiment cannot be performed in the ideal
manner described, the same conclusions have been drawn from countless
accurately performed experiments. One of the most accurate checks is
given by the precise prediction of the motions of planets based on Eq. 3/2.

Inertial System
Although the results of the ideal experiment are obtained for measurements made relative to the “ﬁxed” primary inertial system, they are
equally valid for measurements made with respect to any nonrotating
reference system which translates with a constant velocity with respect
to the primary system. From our study of relative motion in Art. 2/8, we
know that the acceleration measured in a system translating with no acceleration is the same as that measured in the primary system. Thus,
Newton’s second law holds equally well in a nonaccelerating system, so
that we may deﬁne an inertial system as any system in which Eq. 3/2 is
valid.
If the ideal experiment described were performed on the surface of
the earth and all measurements were made relative to a reference system attached to the earth, the measured results would show a slight discrepancy from those predicted by Eq. 3/2, because the measured
acceleration would not be the correct absolute acceleration. The discrepancy would disappear when we introduced the correction due to the acceleration components of the earth. These corrections are negligible for
most engineering problems which involve the motions of structures and
machines on the surface of the earth. In such cases, the accelerations
measured with respect to reference axes attached to the surface of the
earth may be treated as “absolute,” and Eq. 3/2 may be applied with
negligible error to experiments made on the surface of the earth.*
An increasing number of problems occur, particularly in the fields
of rocket and spacecraft design, where the acceleration components of
the earth are of primary concern. For this work it is essential that the
*As an example of the magnitude of the error introduced by neglect of the motion of the
earth, consider a particle which is allowed to fall from rest (relative to earth) at a height h
above the ground. We can show that the rotation of the earth gives rise to an eastward acceleration (Coriolis acceleration) relative to the earth and, neglecting air resistance, that
the particle falls to the ground a distance
xϭ

Ί2h
g

2
␻
3

3

cos ␥

east of the point on the ground directly under that from which it was dropped. The angular
velocity of the earth is ␻ ϭ 0.729(10Ϫ4) rad/s, and the latitude, north or south, is ␥. At a latitude of 45Њ and from a height of 200 m, this eastward deﬂection would be x ϭ 43.9 mm.

Newton’s Second Law

119

120

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

fundamental basis of Newton’s second law be thoroughly understood and
that the appropriate absolute acceleration components be employed.
Before 1905 the laws of Newtonian mechanics had been veriﬁed by
innumerable physical experiments and were considered the ﬁnal description of the motion of bodies. The concept of time, considered an absolute quantity in the Newtonian theory, received a basically different
interpretation in the theory of relativity announced by Einstein in 1905.
The new concept called for a complete reformulation of the accepted
laws of mechanics. The theory of relativity was subjected to early
ridicule, but has been veriﬁed by experiment and is now universally accepted by scientists. Although the difference between the mechanics of
Newton and that of Einstein is basic, there is a practical difference in
the results given by the two theories only when velocities of the order of
the speed of light (300 ϫ 106 m/s) are encountered.* Important problems dealing with atomic and nuclear particles, for example, require calculations based on the theory of relativity.

Systems of Units
It is customary to take k equal to unity in Eq. 3/2, thus putting the
relation in the usual form of Newton’s second law
F ϭ ma

[1/1]

A system of units for which k is unity is known as a kinetic system.
Thus, for a kinetic system the units of force, mass, and acceleration are
not independent. In SI units, as explained in Art. 1/4, the units of force
(newtons, N) are derived by Newton’s second law from the base units of
mass (kilograms, kg) times acceleration (meters per second squared,
m/s2). Thus, N ϭ kg ⅐ m/s2. This system is known as an absolute system
since the unit for force is dependent on the absolute value of mass.
In U.S. customary units, on the other hand, the units of mass
(slugs) are derived from the units of force (pounds force, lb) divided by
acceleration (feet per second squared, ft/sec2). Thus, the mass units are
slugs ϭ lb-sec2/ft. This system is known as a gravitational system since
mass is derived from force as determined from gravitational attraction.
For measurements made relative to the rotating earth, the relative
value of g should be used. The internationally accepted value of g relative to the earth at sea level and at a latitude of 45Њ is 9.806 65 m/s2. Except where greater precision is required, the value of 9.81 m/s2 will be
used for g. For measurements relative to a nonrotating earth, the absolute value of g should be used. At a latitude of 45Њ and at sea level, the
absolute value is 9.8236 m/s2. The sea-level variation in both the absolute
and relative values of g with latitude is shown in Fig. 1/1 of Art. 1/5.

*The theory of relativity demonstrates that there is no such thing as a preferred primary
inertial system and that measurements of time made in two coordinate systems which have
a velocity relative to one another are different. On this basis, for example, the principles of
relativity show that a clock carried by the pilot of a spacecraft traveling around the earth in
a circular polar orbit of 644 km altitude at a velocity of 27 080 km/h would be slow compared with a clock at the pole by 0.000 001 85 s for each orbit.

Article 3/2

In the U.S. customary system, the standard value of g relative to
the rotating earth at sea level and at a latitude of 45Њ is 32.1740 ft/sec2.
The corresponding value relative to a nonrotating earth is 32.2230
ft/sec2.

Force and Mass Units
We need to use both SI units and U.S. customary units, so we must
have a clear understanding of the correct force and mass units in each
system. These units were explained in Art. 1/4, but it will be helpful to
illustrate them here using simple numbers before applying Newton’s
second law. Consider, ﬁrst, the free-fall experiment as depicted in Fig.
3/1a where we release an object from rest near the surface of the earth.
We allow it to fall freely under the inﬂuence of the force of gravitational
attraction W on the body. We call this force the weight of the body. In SI
units for a mass m ϭ 1 kg, the weight is W ϭ 9.81 N, and the corresponding downward acceleration a is g ϭ 9.81 m/s2. In U.S. customary
units for a mass m ϭ 1 lbm (1/32.2 slug), the weight is W ϭ 1 lbf and the
resulting gravitational acceleration is g ϭ 32.2 ft/sec2. For a mass m ϭ 1
slug (32.2 lbm), the weight is W ϭ 32.2 lbf and the acceleration, of
course, is also g ϭ 32.2 ft/sec2.
In Fig. 3/1b we illustrate the proper units with the simplest example
where we accelerate an object of mass m along the horizontal with a
force F. In SI units (an absolute system), a force F ϭ 1 N causes a mass
m ϭ 1 kg to accelerate at the rate a ϭ 1 m/s2. Thus, 1 N ϭ 1 kg ⅐ m/s2. In
the U.S. customary system (a gravitational system), a force F ϭ 1 lbf
SI
___

U.S. Customary
________________
m = 1 lbm
1
—— slug
32.2

m = 1 slug
(32.2 lbm)

W = 1 lbf

W = 32.2 lbf

(

m = 1 kg

W = 9.81 N

)

a = g = 9.81 m /s2

a = g = 32.2 ft /sec 2

(a) Gravitational Free-Fall

SI
___
a=1
F=1N

m /s2

m = 1 kg

U.S. Customary
________________
a = 32.2 ft /sec 2
F = 1 lbf

F = 1 lbf
m= 1lbm
1
( —— slug)
32.2

(b) Newton’s Second Law

Figure 3/1

a = 1 ft/sec 2

m = 1 slug
(32.2 lbm)

Newton’s Second Law

121

122

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

causes a mass m ϭ 1 lbm (1/32.2 slug) to accelerate at the rate a ϭ 32.2
ft/sec2, whereas a force F ϭ 1 lbf causes a mass m ϭ 1 slug (32.2 lbm) to
accelerate at the rate a ϭ 1 ft/sec2.
We note that in SI units where the mass is expressed in kilograms
(kg), the weight W of the body in newtons (N) is given by W ϭ mg,
where g ϭ 9.81 m/s2. In U.S. customary units, the weight W of a body is
expressed in pounds force (lbf), and the mass in slugs (lbf-sec2/ft) is
given by m ϭ W/g, where g ϭ 32.2 ft/sec2.
In U.S. customary units, we frequently speak of the weight of a
body when we really mean mass. It is entirely proper to specify the mass
of a body in pounds (lbm) which must be converted to mass in slugs before substituting into Newton’s second law. Unless otherwise stated, the
pound (lb) is normally used as the unit of force (lbf).

3/3 Equation of Motion
and Solution of Problems
When a particle of mass m is subjected to the action of concurrent
forces F1, F2, F3, . . . whose vector sum is ΣF, Eq. 1/1 becomes
ΣF ϭ ma

(3/3)

When applying Eq. 3/3 to solve problems, we usually express it in scalar
component form with the use of one of the coordinate systems developed
in Chapter 2. The choice of an appropriate coordinate system depends on
the type of motion involved and is a vital step in the formulation of any
problem. Equation 3/3, or any one of the component forms of the forcemass-acceleration equation, is usually called the equation of motion. The
equation of motion gives the instantaneous value of the acceleration corresponding to the instantaneous values of the forces which are acting.

Two Types of Dynamics Problems
We encounter two types of problems when applying Eq. 3/3. In the
ﬁrst type, the acceleration of the particle is either speciﬁed or can be determined directly from known kinematic conditions. We then determine
the corresponding forces which act on the particle by direct substitution
into Eq. 3/3. This problem is generally quite straightforward.
In the second type of problem, the forces acting on the particle are
speciﬁed and we must determine the resulting motion. If the forces are
constant, the acceleration is also constant and is easily found from Eq.
3/3. When the forces are functions of time, position, or velocity, Eq. 3/3
becomes a differential equation which must be integrated to determine
the velocity and displacement.
Problems of this second type are often more formidable, as the integration may be difﬁcult to carry out, particularly when the force is a
mixed function of two or more motion variables. In practice, it is frequently necessary to resort to approximate integration techniques, either numerical or graphical, particularly when experimental data are
involved. The procedures for a mathematical integration of the acceleration when it is a function of the motion variables were developed in Art.

Article 3/3

Equation of Motion and Solution of Problems

2/2, and these same procedures apply when the force is a speciﬁed function of these same parameters, since force and acceleration differ only
by the constant factor of the mass.

Constrained and Unconstrained Motion
There are two physically distinct types of motion, both described by
Eq. 3/3. The ﬁrst type is unconstrained motion where the particle is free
of mechanical guides and follows a path determined by its initial motion
and by the forces which are applied to it from external sources. An airplane or rocket in ﬂight and an electron moving in a charged ﬁeld are
examples of unconstrained motion.
The second type is constrained motion where the path of the particle is partially or totally determined by restraining guides. An icehockey puck is partially constrained to move in the horizontal plane by
the surface of the ice. A train moving along its track and a collar sliding
along a ﬁxed shaft are examples of more fully constrained motion. Some
of the forces acting on a particle during constrained motion may be applied from outside sources, and others may be the reactions on the particle from the constraining guides. All forces, both applied and reactive,
which act on the particle must be accounted for in applying Eq. 3/3.
The choice of an appropriate coordinate system is frequently indicated by the number and geometry of the constraints. Thus, if a particle
is free to move in space, as is the center of mass of the airplane or rocket
in free ﬂight, the particle is said to have three degrees of freedom since
three independent coordinates are required to specify the position of the
particle at any instant. All three of the scalar components of the equation of motion would have to be integrated to obtain the space coordinates as a function of time.
If a particle is constrained to move along a surface, as is the hockey
puck or a marble sliding on the curved surface of a bowl, only two coordinates are needed to specify its position, and in this case it is said to
have two degrees of freedom. If a particle is constrained to move along a
ﬁxed linear path, as is the collar sliding along a ﬁxed shaft, its position
may be speciﬁed by the coordinate measured along the shaft. In this
case, the particle would have only one degree of freedom.

KEY CONCEPTS
Free-Body Diagram
When applying any of the force-mass-acceleration equations of motion, you must account correctly for all forces acting on the particle. The
only forces which we may neglect are those whose magnitudes are negligible compared with other forces acting, such as the forces of mutual attraction between two particles compared with their attraction to a
celestial body such as the earth. The vector sum ΣF of Eq. 3/3 means the
vector sum of all forces acting on the particle in question. Likewise, the
corresponding scalar force summation in any one of the component directions means the sum of the components of all forces acting on the
particle in that particular direction.

123

124

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

The only reliable way to account accurately and consistently for
every force is to isolate the particle under consideration from all contacting and inﬂuencing bodies and replace the bodies removed by the
forces they exert on the particle isolated. The resulting free-body diagram is the means by which every force, known and unknown, which
acts on the particle is represented and thus accounted for. Only after
this vital step has been completed should you write the appropriate
equation or equations of motion.
The free-body diagram serves the same key purpose in dynamics as
it does in statics. This purpose is simply to establish a thoroughly reliable method for the correct evaluation of the resultant of all actual
forces acting on the particle or body in question. In statics this resultant
equals zero, whereas in dynamics it is equated to the product of mass
and acceleration. When you use the vector form of the equation of motion, remember that it represents several scalar equations and that
every equation must be satisﬁed.
Careful and consistent use of the free-body method is the most important single lesson to be learned in the study of engineering mechanics. When drawing a free-body diagram, clearly indicate the coordinate
axes and their positive directions. When you write the equations of motion, make sure all force summations are consistent with the choice of
these positive directions. As an aid to the identiﬁcation of external
forces which act on the body in question, these forces are shown as
heavy red vectors in the illustrations in this book. Sample Problems 3/1
through 3/5 in the next article contain ﬁve examples of free-body diagrams. You should study these to see how the diagrams are constructed.
In solving problems, you may wonder how to get started and what
sequence of steps to follow in arriving at the solution. This difﬁculty
may be minimized by forming the habit of ﬁrst recognizing some relationship between the desired unknown quantity in the problem and
other quantities, known and unknown. Then determine additional relationships between these unknowns and other quantities, known and unknown. Finally, establish the dependence on the original data and
develop the procedure for the analysis and computation. A few minutes
spent organizing the plan of attack through recognition of the dependence of one quantity on another will be time well spent and will usually
prevent groping for the answer with irrelevant calculations.

3/4

Rectilinear Motion

We now apply the concepts discussed in Arts. 3/2 and 3/3 to problems in particle motion, starting with rectilinear motion in this article
and treating curvilinear motion in Art. 3/5. In both articles, we will analyze the motions of bodies which can be treated as particles. This simpliﬁcation is possible as long as we are interested only in the motion of the
mass center of the body. In this case we may treat the forces as concurrent through the mass center. We will account for the action of nonconcurrent forces on the motions of bodies when we discuss the kinetics of
rigid bodies in Chapter 6.

Article 3/4

If we choose the x-direction, for example, as the direction of the rectilinear motion of a particle of mass m, the acceleration in the y- and
z-directions will be zero and the scalar components of Eq. 3/3 become
ΣFx ϭ max
ΣFy ϭ 0

(3/4)

ΣFz ϭ 0
For cases where we are not free to choose a coordinate direction
along the motion, we would have in the general case all three component equations
ΣFx ϭ max
ΣFy ϭ may

(3/5)

ΣFz ϭ maz
where the acceleration and resultant force are given by
a ϭ a xi ϩ a y j ϩ a z k
a ϭ Ίax2 ϩ ay2 ϩ az2
ΣF ϭ ΣFxi ϩ ΣFy j ϩ ΣFzk

© CTK/Alamy

͉ΣF͉ ϭ Ί(ΣFx)2 ϩ (ΣFy)2 ϩ (ΣFz)2

This view of a car-collision test suggests that very large accelerations and
accompanying large forces occur throughout the system of the two cars.
The crash dummies are also subjected to large forces, primarily by the
shoulder-harness/seat-belt restraints.

Rectilinear Motion

125

126

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

SAMPLE PROBLEM 3/1

y

A 75-kg man stands on a spring scale in an elevator. During the ﬁrst 3 seconds of motion from rest, the tension T in the hoisting cable is 8300 N. Find the
reading R of the scale in newtons during this interval and the upward velocity v
of the elevator at the end of the 3 seconds. The total mass of the elevator, man,
and scale is 750 kg.

T = 8300 N
y
ay

ay
75(9.81) = 736 N

Solution.

The force registered by the scale and the velocity both depend on
the acceleration of the elevator, which is constant during the interval for which
the forces are constant. From the free-body diagram of the elevator, scale, and
man taken together, the acceleration is found to be

[ΣFy ϭ may]

8300 Ϫ 7360 ϭ 750ay

The scale reads the downward force exerted on it by the man’s feet. The equal
and opposite reaction R to this action is shown on the free-body diagram of the
man alone together with his weight, and the equation of motion for him gives

ᕡ [ΣFy ϭ may]

R Ϫ 736 ϭ 75(1.257)

R ϭ 830 N

Ans.

The velocity reached at the end of the 3 seconds is
[⌬v ϭ

͵ a dt]

vϪ0ϭ

͵

3

1.257 dt

0

v ϭ 3.77 m/s

R

750(9.81) = 7360 N

ay ϭ 1.257 m/s2

Ans.

Helpful Hint

ᕡ If the scale were calibrated in kilo-

grams, it would read 830/9.81 ϭ
84.6 kg which, of course, is not his
true mass since the measurement
was made in a noninertial (accelerating) system. Suggestion: Rework this
problem in U.S. customary units.

SAMPLE PROBLEM 3/2

12
5

A small inspection car with a mass of 200 kg runs along the ﬁxed overhead
cable and is controlled by the attached cable at A. Determine the acceleration of
the car when the control cable is horizontal and under a tension T ϭ 2.4 kN.
Also ﬁnd the total force P exerted by the supporting cable on the wheels.

T

A

Solution.

The free-body diagram of the car and wheels taken together and
treated as a particle discloses the 2.4-kN tension T, the weight W ϭ mg ϭ
200(9.81) ϭ 1962 N, and the force P exerted on the wheel assembly by the cable.
The car is in equilibrium in the y-direction since there is no acceleration in
this direction. Thus,

[ΣFy ϭ 0]

ᕡ

5
P Ϫ 2.4(13 ) Ϫ 1.962(12 ) ϭ 0
13

P ϭ 2.73 kN

y
12
5

5

2400(12 ) Ϫ 1962(13 ) ϭ 200a
13

5

Ans.

12

G

a ϭ 7.30 m/s2

x

a

In the x-direction the equation of motion gives
[ΣFx ϭ max]

P

T = 2.4 kN

Ans.
W = mg = 1962 N

Helpful Hint

ᕡ By choosing our coordinate axes along and normal to the direction of the acceleration, we are able to solve the two equations independently. Would this be so if x and y were chosen as horizontal and vertical?

Article 3/4

Rectilinear Motion

127

SAMPLE PROBLEM 3/3
The 250-lb concrete block A is released from rest in the position shown and
pulls the 400-lb log up the 30Њ ramp. If the coefﬁcient of kinetic friction between
the log and the ramp is 0.5, determine the velocity of the block as it hits the
ground at B.

C
400 lb
A

μ k = 0.5
30°

Solution.

The motions of the log and the block A are clearly dependent. Although by now it should be evident that the acceleration of the log up the incline
is half the downward acceleration of A, we may prove it formally. The constant
total length of the cable is L ϭ 2sC ϩ sA ϩ constant, where the constant accounts
ᕡ for the cable portions wrapped around the pulleys. Differentiating twice with respect to time gives 0 ϭ 2s C ϩ ¨A, or
s
¨

sA

C

We assume here that the masses of the pulleys are negligible and that they
turn with negligible friction. With these assumptions the free-body diagram of
the pulley C discloses force and moment equilibrium. Thus, the tension in the
cable attached to the log is twice that applied to the block. Note that the accelerations of the log and the center of pulley C are identical.
The free-body diagram of the log shows the friction force ␮k N for motion up
the plane. Equilibrium of the log in the y-direction gives
N Ϫ 400 cos 30Њ ϭ 0

0.5(346) Ϫ 2T ϩ 400 sin 30Њ ϭ

250 Ϫ T ϭ

400
a
32.2 C

y

vA ϭ Ί2(5.83)(20) ϭ 15.27 ft/sec

0.5N

250 lb +

Helpful Hints

ᕡ The coordinates used in expressing

250
a
32.2 A

aC ϭ Ϫ2.92 ft/sec2

T
T

400 lb

N

the ﬁnal kinematic constraint relationship must be consistent with
those used for the kinetic equations
of motion.

ᕢ We can verify that the log will inT ϭ 205 lb

ᕤ For the 20-ft drop with constant acceleration, the block acquires a velocity
[v2 ϭ 2ax]

2T

x

Solving the three equations in aC, aA, and T gives us
aA ϭ 5.83 ft/sec2

T
C

2T

For the block in the positive downward direction, we have

ᕣ [ϩ b ΣF ϭ ma]

A

N ϭ 346 lb

and its equation of motion in the x-direction gives
[ΣFx ϭ max]

B

sC

0 ϭ 2aC ϩ aA

ᕢ [ΣFy ϭ 0]

250 lb

20′

Ans.

deed move up the ramp by calculating the force in the cable necessary
to initiate motion from the equilibrium condition. This force is 2T ϭ
0.5N ϩ 400 sin 30Њ ϭ 373 lb or T ϭ
186.5 lb, which is less than the 250lb weight of block A. Hence, the log
will move up.

ᕣ Note the serious error in assuming
that T ϭ 250 lb, in which case, block
A would not accelerate.

ᕤ Because the forces on this system remain constant, the resulting accelerations also remain constant.

128

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

SAMPLE PROBLEM 3/4

8

We approximate the resistance-velocity relation by R ϭ kv2 and
find k by substituting R ϭ 8 N and v ϭ 2 m/s into the equation, which gives
k ϭ 8/22 ϭ 2 N ⅐ s2/m2. Thus, R ϭ 2v2.
The only horizontal force on the model is R, so that

Solution.

ᕡ [ΣFx ϭ max]

ϪR ϭ max

or

6
R, N

The design model for a new ship has a mass of 10 kg and is tested in an experimental towing tank to determine its resistance to motion through the water at
various speeds. The test results are plotted on the accompanying graph, and the
resistance R may be closely approximated by the dashed parabolic curve shown. If
the model is released when it has a speed of 2 m/s, determine the time t required
for it to reduce its speed to 1 m/s and the corresponding travel distance x.

4
2
0
0

1

2

v, m /s
v0 = 2 m/s

v

dv
Ϫ2v2 ϭ 10
dt

x

W

We separate the variables and integrate to obtain

͵ dt ϭ Ϫ5 ͵
t

0

v

2

dv
v2

tϭ5

΂1 Ϫ 1΃ s
v 2

Thus, when v ϭ v0 /2 ϭ 1 m/s, the time is t ϭ 5(1 Ϫ 1 ) ϭ 2.5 s.
2
1

Ans.

The distance traveled during the 2.5 seconds is obtained by integrating v ϭ
dx/dt. Thus, v ϭ 10/(5 ϩ 2t) so that

͵

ᕢ

x

0

dx ϭ

͵

2.5

0

10
dt
5 ϩ 2t

xϭ

10
ln (5 ϩ 2t)
2

ͯ

2.5

ϭ 3.47 m

0

Ans.

SAMPLE PROBLEM 3/5

Solution.

After drawing the free-body diagram, we apply the equation of motion in the y-direction to get
F cos ␪ Ϫ ␮k N Ϫ mg ϭ m

dv
dt

͵ (F cos kt Ϫ ␮ F sin kt Ϫ mg) dt ϭ m ͵
t

k

v

dv

0

for R.

ᕢ Suggestion: Express the distance x
after release in terms of the velocity
v and see if you agree with the resulting relation x ϭ 5 ln (v0 /v).

F
μk N θ

m

F

N

μk

mg

ᕡ If ␪ were expressed as a function of
the vertical displacement y instead
of the time t, the acceleration would
become a function of the displacement and we would use v dv ϭ a dy.

ᕢ We see that the results do not de-

which becomes

pend on k, the rate at which the
force changes direction.

F
[sin kt ϩ ␮k(cos kt Ϫ 1)] Ϫ mgt ϭ mv
k
For ␪ ϭ ␲/2 the time becomes t ϭ ␲/2k, and v ϭ 0 so that

ᕢ

ᕡ Be careful to observe the minus sign

Helpful Hints

where equilibrium in the horizontal direction requires N ϭ F sin ␪. Substituting
␪ ϭ kt and integrating ﬁrst between general limits give

0

Helpful Hints

θ

The collar of mass m slides up the vertical shaft under the action of a force
F of constant magnitude but variable direction. If ␪ ϭ kt where k is a constant
and if the collar starts from rest with ␪ ϭ 0, determine the magnitude F of the
force which will result in the collar coming to rest as ␪ reaches ␲/2. The coefﬁcient of kinetic friction between the collar and shaft is ␮k.

ᕡ [ΣFy ϭ may]

R

B=W

mg␲
F
[1 ϩ ␮k(0 Ϫ 1)] Ϫ
ϭ0
k
2k

and

Fϭ

mg␲
2(1 Ϫ ␮k)

Ans.

Article 3/4

PROBLEMS
Introductory Problems
3/1 The 50-kg crate is projected along the ﬂoor with an
initial speed of 7 m/s at x ϭ 0. The coefﬁcient of kinetic friction is 0.40. Calculate the time required for
the crate to come to rest and the corresponding distance x traveled.

Problems

129

3/4 A 60-kg woman holds a 9-kg package as she stands
within an elevator which brieﬂy accelerates upward at
a rate of g/4. Determine the force R which the elevator
ﬂoor exerts on her feet and the lifting force L which
she exerts on the package during the acceleration interval. If the elevator support cables suddenly and
completely fail, what values would R and L acquire?

v0 = 7 m/s

50 kg
μk = 0.40

9 kg

x

g
––
4

Problem 3/1

3/2 The 50-kg crate of Prob. 3/1 is now projected down an
incline as shown with an initial speed of 7 m/s. Investigate the time t required for the crate to come to rest
and the corresponding distance x traveled if (a) ␪ ϭ 15Њ
and (b) ␪ ϭ 30Њ.
v0 =
7m
/s
μk =
0.40

60 kg

Problem 3/4

3/5 During a brake test, the rear-engine car is stopped
from an initial speed of 100 km/h in a distance of
50 m. If it is known that all four wheels contribute
equally to the braking force, determine the braking
force F at each wheel. Assume a constant deceleration for the 1500-kg car.

50 k

g

x
θ

Problem 3/2

3/3 The 100-lb crate is carefully placed with zero velocity
on the incline. Describe what happens if (a) ␪ ϭ 15Њ
and (b) ␪ ϭ 20Њ

μ s = 0.30

100

μk = 0.25

lb

θ

Problem 3/3

50 m
v1 = 100 km/h

v2 = 0
Problem 3/5

130

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

3/6 What fraction n of the weight of the jet airplane is
the net thrust (nozzle thrust T minus air resistance
R) required for the airplane to climb at an angle ␪
with the horizontal with an acceleration a in the direction of ﬂight?

3/9

A man pulls himself up the 15Њ incline by the method
shown. If the combined mass of the man and cart is
100 kg, determine the acceleration of the cart if the
man exerts a pull of 250 N on the rope. Neglect all
friction and the mass of the rope, pulleys, and wheels.

R

T

θ

Problem 3/6

3/7 The 300-Mg jet airliner has three engines, each of
which produces a nearly constant thrust of 240 kN during the takeoff roll. Determine the length s of runway
required if the takeoff speed is 220 km/h. Compute s
ﬁrst for an uphill takeoff direction from A to B and second for a downhill takeoff from B to A on the slightly
inclined runway. Neglect air and rolling resistance.
0.5°

B

A

15°

Problem 3/9

3/10 A car is climbing the hill of slope ␪1 at a constant
speed v. If the slope decreases abruptly to ␪2 at point
A, determine the acceleration a of the car just after
passing point A if the driver does not change the
throttle setting or shift into a different gear.
a

Horizontal

v = const.

A

θ2

Problem 3/7

3/8 The 180-lb man in the bosun’s chair exerts a pull of
50 lb on the rope for a short interval. Find his acceleration. Neglect the mass of the chair, rope, and pulleys.

θ1

Problem 3/10

3/11 Calculate the vertical acceleration a of the 100-lb
cylinder for each of the two cases illustrated. Neglect friction and the mass of the pulleys.

100 lb

150 lb

100 lb

(a)

(b)
Problem 3/11

Problem 3/8

150 lb

Article 3/4
3/12 A driver ﬁnds that her car will descend the slope
␪1 ϭ 3Њ at a certain constant speed with no brakes or
throttle required. The slope decreases fairly
abruptly to ␪2 at point A. If the driver takes no action but continues to coast, determine the acceleration a of the car just after it passes point A for the
conditions (a) ␪2 ϭ 1.5Њ and (b) ␪2 ϭ 0.

Problems

131

3/16 The collar A is free to slide along the smooth shaft B
mounted in the frame. The plane of the frame is
vertical. Determine the horizontal acceleration a of
the frame necessary to maintain the collar in a ﬁxed
position on the shaft.

v = constant

A

B

a

A

θ1

30°

θ2

Problem 3/12

3/13 By itself, the 2500-kg pickup truck executes a 0–100
km/h acceleration run in 10 s along a level road.
What would be the corresponding time when pulling
the 500-kg trailer? Assume constant acceleration
and neglect all retarding forces.
2500 kg
500 kg
5°
O

Problem 3/16

3/17 The 5-oz pinewood-derby car is released from rest at
the starting line A and crosses the ﬁnish line C 2.75
sec later. The transition at B is small and smooth.
Assume that the net retarding force is constant
throughout the run and ﬁnd this force.
20°

A
C

B

A

10′
15′

Problem 3/13

3/14 Reconsider the pickup-truck/trailer combination of
the previous problem. If the unit uniformly accelerates from rest to a speed of 25 m/s in a distance of
150 m, determine the tension T in the towing
tongue OA. Neglect all effects of the 5Њ tongue
angle, i.e., assume that OA is horizontal.

Problem 3/17

3/18 The beam and attached hoisting mechanism together
weigh 2400 lb with center of gravity at G. If the initial acceleration a of point P on the hoisting cable is
20 ft/sec2, calculate the corresponding reaction at
the support A.

Representative Problems
3/15 A train consists of a 400,000-lb locomotive and one
hundred 200,000-lb hopper cars. If the locomotive
exerts a friction force of 40,000 lb on the rails in
starting the train from rest, compute the forces in
couplers 1 and 100. Assume no slack in the couplers
and neglect friction associated with the hopper cars.

100

99

98

3

8′

8′

2

Problem 3/15

a
B

P

G
A

12″

10′

1000 lb

1
Problem 3/18

132

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

3/19 The 10-kg steel sphere is suspended from the 15-kg
frame which slides down the 20Њ incline. If the coefﬁcient of kinetic friction between the frame and incline is 0.15, compute the tension in each of the
supporting wires A and B.

A 45°

3/23 Small objects are delivered to the 72-in. inclined
chute by a conveyor belt A which moves at a speed
v1 ϭ 1.2 ft/sec. If the conveyor belt B has a speed
v2 ϭ 3.0 ft/sec and the objects are delivered to this
belt with no slipping, calculate the coefﬁcient of friction ␮k between the objects and the chute.
v1

45°

72

B
A

μk =

″

30°
v2

0.15
20°

B

Problem 3/19

Problem 3/23

3/20 The block shown is observed to have a velocity
v1 ϭ 20 ft/sec as it passes point A and a velocity
v2 ϭ 10 ft/sec as it passes point B on the incline.
Calculate the coefﬁcient of kinetic friction ␮k between the block and the incline if x ϭ 30 ft and
␪ ϭ 15Њ.

3/24 If the coefﬁcients of static and kinetic friction between the 20-kg block A and the 100-kg cart B are
both essentially the same value of 0.50, determine
the acceleration of each part for (a) P ϭ 60 N and
(b) P ϭ 40 N.
P
A

A

100 kg

B
v1

x

20 kg

B
Problem 3/24
θ

v2

Problem 3/20

3/21 Determine the initial acceleration of the 15-kg block
if (a) T ϭ 23 N and (b) T ϭ 26 N. The system is initially at rest with no slack in the cable, and the
mass and friction of the pulleys are negligible.

3/25 A simple pendulum is pivoted at O and is free to
swing in the vertical plane of the plate. If the plate
is given a constant acceleration a up the incline ␪,
write an expression for the steady angle ␤ assumed
by the pendulum after all initial start-up oscillations have ceased. Neglect the mass of the slender
supporting rod.
O

T
15 kg

a

30°

β

μ s = 0.50
μ k = 0.40

Problem 3/21

3/22 The system of the previous problem starts from rest
with no slack in the cable. What value of the tension
T will result in an initial block acceleration of 0.8
m/s2 to the right?

θ

Problem 3/25

Article 3/4
3/26 The tractor-trailer unit is moving down the incline
with a speed of 5 mi/hr when the driver brakes the
tractor to a stop in a distance of 4 ft. Estimate the
percent increase n in the hitch-force component
which is parallel to the incline, compared with the
force present at steady speed. The cart and its load
combined weigh 500 lb. State any assumptions.

Problems

133

3/28 The acceleration of the 50-kg carriage A in its
smooth vertical guides is controlled by the tension T
exerted on the control cable which passes around the
two circular pegs ﬁxed to the carriage. Determine
the value of T required to limit the downward acceleration of the carriage to 1.2 m/s2 if the coefﬁcient of
friction between the cable and the pegs is 0.20. (Recall the relation between the tensions in a ﬂexible
cable which is slipping on a ﬁxed peg: T2 ϭ T1e␮␤.)
T2
T1

A

A

4

β

12

Problem 3/26

3/27 The device shown is used as an accelerometer and
consists of a 4-oz plunger A which deﬂects the
spring as the housing of the unit is given an upward
acceleration a. Specify the necessary spring stiffness
k which will permit the plunger to deﬂect 1/4 in. beyond the equilibrium position and touch the electrical contact when the steadily but slowly increasing
upward acceleration reaches 5g. Friction may be
neglected.

T
Problem 3/28

3/29 The system is released from rest with the cable taut.
For the friction coefﬁcients ␮s ϭ 0.25 and ␮k ϭ 0.20,
calculate the acceleration of each body and the tension T in the cable. Neglect the small mass and friction of the pulleys.

A

a
A
1″
—
4

μ s, μk

60

kg

20 kg
30°
B
Problem 3/29
Problem 3/27

134

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

3/30 A jet airplane with a mass of 5 Mg has a touchdown
speed of 300 km/h, at which instant the braking
parachute is deployed and the power shut off. If the
total drag on the aircraft varies with velocity as
shown in the accompanying graph, calculate the distance x along the runway required to reduce the
speed to 150 km/h. Approximate the variation of the
drag by an equation of the form D ϭ kv2, where k is
a constant.

3/32 The sliders A and B are connected by a light rigid
bar of length l ϭ 0.5 m and move with negligible
friction in the slots, both of which lie in a horizontal
plane. For the position where xA ϭ 0.4 m, the velocity of A is vA ϭ 0.9 m/s to the right. Determine the
acceleration of each slider and the force in the bar
at this instant.

3 kg
v

B
0.5 m
2 kg
A

120

Drag D, kN

100

P = 40 N

xA

80

Problem 3/32

60
40
20
0
0

100

200

300

Velocity v, km/h

Problem 3/30

3/31 A heavy chain with a mass ␳ per unit length is
pulled by the constant force P along a horizontal
surface consisting of a smooth section and a rough
section. The chain is initially at rest on the rough
surface with x ϭ 0. If the coefﬁcient of kinetic friction between the chain and the rough surface is ␮k,
determine the velocity v of the chain when x ϭ L.
The force P is greater than ␮k␳gL in order to initiate motion.

3/33 The sliders A and B are connected by a light rigid
bar and move with negligible friction in the slots,
both of which lie in a horizontal plane. For the position shown, the hydraulic cylinder imparts a velocity and acceleration to slider A of 0.4 m/s and 2 m/s2,
respectively, both to the right. Determine the acceleration of slider B and the force in the bar at this
instant.

3 kg
B
0.5
m

60°

L

30°

2 kg
A

x
P
Problem 3/33
Rough μ k
Problem 3/31

Smooth

Article 3/4
3/34 The 4-lb collar is released from rest against the light
elastic spring, which has a stiffness of 10 lb/in. and
has been compressed a distance of 6 in. Determine
the acceleration a of the collar as a function of the
vertical displacement x of the collar measured in
feet from the point of release. Find the velocity v of
the collar when x ϭ 0.5 ft. Friction is negligible.

x

Problems

135

3/36 Two conﬁgurations for raising an elevator are shown.
Elevator A with attached hoisting motor and drum
has a total mass of 900 kg. Elevator B without
motor and drum also has a mass of 900 kg. If the
motor supplies a constant torque of 600 N ⅐ m to its
250-mm-diameter drum for 2 s in each case, select
the conﬁguration which results in the greater upward acceleration and determine the corresponding
velocity v of the elevator 1.2 s after it starts from
rest. The mass of the motorized drum is small, thus
permitting it to be analyzed as though it were in
equilibrium. Neglect the mass of cables and pulleys
and all friction.

250 mm

Problem 3/34

3/35 The nonlinear spring has a tensile force-deﬂection
relationship given by Fs ϭ 150x ϩ 400x2, where x is
in meters and Fs is in newtons. Determine the acceleration of the 6-kg block if it is released from rest at
(a) x ϭ 50 mm and (b) x ϭ 100 mm.
Undeformed spring
position

A

B
250 mm

(a)

(b)

x

6 kg

μ s = 0.30
μ k = 0.25

Problem 3/36

3/37 Compute the acceleration of block A for the instant
depicted. Neglect the masses of the pulleys.

Problem 3/35

30°
40 kg

T = 100 N

μ s = 0.50 ⎫

⎬
μk = 0.40 ⎭

A

Problem 3/37

136

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

3/38 The inclined block A is given a constant rightward
acceleration a. Determine the range of values of ␪
for which block B will not slip relative to block A,
regardless of how large the acceleration a is. The coefﬁcient of static friction between the blocks is ␮s.
μs

B
a
A

θ

3/40 A shock absorber is a mechanical device which provides resistance to compression or extension given
by R ϭ cv, where c is a constant and v is the time
rate of change of the length of the absorber. An absorber of constant c ϭ 3000 N ⅐ s/m is shown being
tested with a 100-kg cylinder suspended from it.
The system is released with the cable taut at y ϭ 0
and allowed to extend. Determine (a) the steadystate velocity vs of the lower end of the absorber and
(b) the time t and displacement y of the lower end
when the cylinder has reached 90 percent of its
steady-state speed. Neglect the mass of the piston
and attached rod.

Problem 3/38

3/39 A spring-loaded device imparts an initial vertical velocity of 50 m/s to a 0.15-kg ball. The drag force on
the ball is FD ϭ 0.002v2, where FD is in newtons
when the speed v is in meters per second. Determine
the maximum altitude h attained by the ball (a) with
drag considered and (b) with drag neglected.
v0 = 50 m/s

•
c = 3000 N s
m

y

0.15 kg
m = 100 kg

Problem 3/40
Problem 3/39

3/41 The design of a lunar mission calls for a 1200-kg
spacecraft to lift off from the surface of the moon
and travel in a straight line from point A and pass
point B. If the spacecraft motor has a constant
thrust of 2500 N, determine the speed of the spacecraft as it passes point B. Use Table D/2 and the
gravitational law from Chapter 1 as needed.
R

O

R

A

Problem 3/41

B

Article 3/4
3/42 For what value(s) of the angle ␪ will the acceleration
of the 80-lb block be 26 ft/sec2 to the right?
P = 100 lb
80 lb
θ

Problems

137

᭤3/45 The system is released from rest in the position
shown. Calculate the tension T in the cord and the
acceleration a of the 30-kg block. The small pulley
attached to the block has negligible mass and friction. (Suggestion: First establish the kinematic relationship between the accelerations of the two
bodies.)

μs = 0.6, μ k = 0.5

4
3

Problem 3/42

᭤3/43 With the blocks initially at rest, the force P is increased slowly from zero to 60 lb. Plot the accelerations of both masses as functions of P.
μ s = 0.20
μ k = 0.15
μ s = 0.15
μ k = 0.10

30 kg

μ s = μ k = μ = 0.25

A 80 lb
B
100 lb

P
15 kg

Problem 3/43

᭤3/44 An object projected vertically up from the surface of
the earth with a sufﬁciently high velocity v0 can escape from the earth’s gravitational ﬁeld. Calculate
this velocity on the basis of the absence of an atmosphere to offer resistance due to air friction. To eliminate the effect of the earth’s rotation on the
velocity measurement, consider the launch to be
from the north or south pole. Use the mean radius
of the earth and the absolute value of g as cited in
Art. 1/5 and compare your answer with the value
cited in Table D/2.

Problem 3/45

᭤3/46 The rod of the ﬁxed hydraulic cylinder is moving to
the left with a speed of 100 mm/s and this speed is
momentarily increasing at a rate of 400 mm/s each second at the instant when sA ϭ 425 mm. Determine the
tension in the cord at that instant. The mass of
slider B is 0.5 kg, the length of the cord is 1050 mm,
and the effects of the radius and friction of the small
pulley at A are negligible. Find results for cases
(a) negligible friction at slider B and (b) ␮k ϭ 0.40 at
slider B. The action is in a vertical plane.
sA
C
250 mm
A

0.5 kg

Problem 3/46

B

138

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

3/5

Curvilinear Motion

Arno Balzarini/EPA/NewsCom

We turn our attention now to the kinetics of particles which move
along plane curvilinear paths. In applying Newton’s second law, Eq. 3/3,
we will make use of the three coordinate descriptions of acceleration in
curvilinear motion which we developed in Arts. 2/4, 2/5, and 2/6.
The choice of an appropriate coordinate system depends on the conditions of the problem and is one of the basic decisions to be made in
solving curvilinear-motion problems. We now rewrite Eq. 3/3 in three
ways, the choice of which depends on which coordinate system is most
appropriate.
Rectangular coordinates (Art. 2/4, Fig. 2/7)
ΣFx ϭ max

(3/6)

ΣFy ϭ may

where

ax ϭ ¨
x

ay ϭ ¨
y

and

Normal and tangential coordinates (Art. 2/5, Fig. 2/10)
Because of the banking in the turn of
this track, the normal reaction force
provides most of the normal acceleration of the bobsled.

ΣFn ϭ man

(3/7)

ΣFt ϭ mat

where

˙
˙
an ϭ ␳␤ 2 ϭ v2/␳ ϭ v␤ ,

a t ϭ ˙,
v

and

˙
v ϭ ␳␤

Polar coordinates (Art. 2/6, Fig. 2/15)
ΣFr ϭ mar

(3/8)

ΣF␪ ϭ ma␪

© David Wall/Alamy

where

At the highest point of the swing,
this child experiences tangential
acceleration. An instant later, when
she has acquired velocity, she will
experience normal acceleration as
well.

˙
r
ar ϭ ¨ Ϫ r ␪ 2

and

¨
a␪ ϭ r ␪ ϩ 2r ␪
˙˙

In applying these motion equations to a body treated as a particle,
you should follow the general procedure established in the previous article on rectilinear motion. After you identify the motion and choose
the coordinate system, draw the free-body diagram of the body. Then
obtain the appropriate force summations from this diagram in the
usual way. The free-body diagram should be complete to avoid incorrect force summations.
Once you assign reference axes, you must use the expressions for
both the forces and the acceleration which are consistent with that assignment. In the ﬁrst of Eqs. 3/7, for example, the positive sense of the
n-axis is toward the center of curvature, and so the positive sense of our
force summation ΣFn must also be toward the center of curvature to
agree with the positive sense of the acceleration an ϭ v2/␳.

Article 3/5

Curvilinear Motion

139

SAMPLE PROBLEM 3/6
Determine the maximum speed v which the sliding block may have as it
passes point A without losing contact with the surface.

Solution.

The condition for loss of contact is that the normal force N which
the surface exerts on the block goes to zero. Summing forces in the normal direction gives

[ΣFn ϭ man]

mg ϭ m

v2
␳

v ϭ Ίg␳

Ans.

If the speed at A were less than Ίg␳, then an upward normal force exerted by the
surface on the block would exist. In order for the block to have a speed at A
which is greater than Ίg␳, some type of constraint, such as a second curved surface above the block, would have to be introduced to provide additional downward force.

SAMPLE PROBLEM 3/7
Small objects are released from rest at A and slide down the smooth circular
surface of radius R to a conveyor B. Determine the expression for the normal
contact force N between the guide and each object in terms of ␪ and specify the
correct angular velocity ␻ of the conveyor pulley of radius r to prevent any sliding on the belt as the objects transfer to the conveyor.

Solution.

The free-body diagram of the object is shown together with the coordinate directions n and t. The normal force N depends on the n-component of
the acceleration which, in turn, depends on the velocity. The velocity will be cumulative according to the tangential acceleration at. Hence, we will ﬁnd at ﬁrst
for any general position.
mg cos ␪ ϭ mat

[ΣFt ϭ mat]

at ϭ g cos ␪

ᕡ Now we can ﬁnd the velocity by integrating
[v dv ϭ at ds]

͵

v

0

v dv ϭ

͵

␪

0

Helpful Hint
g cos ␪ d(R␪)

v2

ϭ 2gR sin ␪

ᕡ It is essential here that we recognize

We obtain the normal force by summing forces in the positive n-direction, which
is the direction of the n-component of acceleration.
[ΣFn ϭ man]

N Ϫ mg sin ␪ ϭ m

v2
R

N ϭ 3mg sin ␪

Ans.

The conveyor pulley must turn at the rate v ϭ r␻ for ␪ ϭ ␲/2, so that
␻ ϭ Ί2gR/r

Ans.

the need to express the tangential acceleration as a function of position so
that v may be found by integrating
the kinematical relation v dv ϭ at ds,
in which all quantities are measured
along the path.

140

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

SAMPLE PROBLEM 3/8
A 1500-kg car enters a section of curved road in the horizontal plane and
slows down at a uniform rate from a speed of 100 km/h at A to a speed of 50
km/h as it passes C. The radius of curvature ␳ of the road at A is 400 m and at C
is 80 m. Determine the total horizontal force exerted by the road on the tires at
positions A, B, and C. Point B is the inﬂection point where the curvature
changes direction.

Solution.

The car will be treated as a particle so that the effect of all forces exerted by the road on the tires will be treated as a single force. Since the motion is
described along the direction of the road, normal and tangential coordinates will
be used to specify the acceleration of the car. We will then determine the forces
from the accelerations.
The constant tangential acceleration is in the negative t-direction, and its
magnitude is given by

ᕡ [vC2 ϭ vA2 ϩ 2at ⌬s]

at ϭ

ͯ

ͯ

(50/3.6)2 Ϫ (100/3.6)2
ϭ 1.447 m/s2
2(200)

The normal components of acceleration at A, B, and C are

ᕢ [an ϭ v2/␳]

Helpful Hints

ᕡ Recognize the numerical value of

(100/3.6)2
ϭ 1.929 m/s2
400

At A,

an ϭ

At B,

an ϭ 0

At C,

an ϭ

the conversion factor from km/h to
m/s as 1000/3600 or 1/3.6.

ᕢ Note that an is always directed to-

(50/3.6)2
ϭ 2.41 m/s2
80

ward the center of curvature.

Application of Newton’s second law in both the n- and t-directions to the
free-body diagrams of the car gives
[ΣFt ϭ mat]

ᕣ [ΣFn ϭ man]

Ft ϭ 1500(1.447) ϭ 2170 N
At A,

Fn ϭ 1500(1.929) ϭ 2890 N

At B,

Fn ϭ 0

At C,

Fn ϭ 1500(2.41) ϭ 3620 N

ᕣ Note that the direction of Fn must
agree with that of an.

Thus, the total horizontal force acting on the tires becomes
At A,

Ans.

At B,

ᕤ

F ϭ ΊFn2 ϩ Ft2 ϭ Ί(2890)2 ϩ (2170)2 ϭ 3620 N
F ϭ Ft ϭ 2170 N

Ans.

At C,

F ϭ ΊFn ϩ Ft ϭ
2

2

Ί(3620)2

ϩ

(2170)2

ϭ 4220 N

Ans.

ᕤ The angle made by a and F with the
direction of the path can be computed if desired.

Article 3/5

Curvilinear Motion

141

SAMPLE PROBLEM 3/9
Compute the magnitude v of the velocity required for the spacecraft S to
maintain a circular orbit of altitude 200 mi above the surface of the earth.

Solution.

The only external force acting on the spacecraft is the force of gravi-

ᕡ tational attraction to the earth (i.e., its weight), as shown in the free-body diagram. Summing forces in the normal direction yields
[ΣFn ϭ man]

G

mme
(R ϩ h)

2

ϭm

v2 ,
(R ϩ h)

vϭ

Gme

g

Ί(R ϩ h) ϭ R Ί(R ϩ h)

where the substitution gR2 ϭ Gme has been made. Substitution of numbers gives
v ϭ (3959)(5280)

32.234
Ί(3959 ϩ 200)(5280) ϭ 25,326 ft/sec

Ans.

Helpful Hint

ᕡ Note that, for observations made within an inertial frame of reference, there is no such quantity as “centrifugal force” acting in the minus n-direction. Note also that neither the spacecraft nor its occupants are “weightless,” because the weight
in each case is given by Newton’s law of gravitation. For this altitude, the weights are only about 10 percent less than the
earth-surface values. Finally, the term “zero-g” is also misleading. It is only when we make our observations with respect
to a coordinate system which has an acceleration equal to the gravitational acceleration (such as in an orbiting spacecraft)
that we appear to be in a “zero-g” environment. The quantity which does go to zero aboard orbiting spacecraft is the familiar normal force associated with, for example, an object in contact with a horizontal surface within the spacecraft.

SAMPLE PROBLEM 3/10
˙
Tube A rotates about the vertical O-axis with a constant angular rate ␪ ϭ ␻
and contains a small cylindrical plug B of mass m whose radial position is controlled by the cord which passes freely through the tube and shaft and is wound
around the drum of radius b. Determine the tension T in the cord and the horizontal component F␪ of force exerted by the tube on the plug if the constant angular rate of rotation of the drum is ␻0 ﬁrst in the direction for case (a) and
second in the direction for case (b). Neglect friction.

Solution.

With r a variable, we use the polar-coordinate form of the equations
of motion, Eqs. 3/8. The free-body diagram of B is shown in the horizontal plane
and discloses only T and F␪. The equations of motion are

[ΣFr ϭ mar]
[ΣF␪ ϭ ma␪]

˙
ϪT ϭ m(r Ϫ r ␪ 2)
¨
¨
F␪ ϭ m(r ␪ ϩ 2r ␪ )
˙˙

¨
Case (a). With ˙ ϭ ϩb␻0, ¨ ϭ 0, and ␪ ϭ 0, the forces become
r
r
T ϭ mr␻2

F␪ ϭ 2mb␻0␻

Ans.
Helpful Hint

¨
ᕡ Case (b). With ˙ ϭ Ϫb␻0, ¨ ϭ 0, and ␪ ϭ 0, the forces become
r
r
T ϭ mr␻2

F␪ ϭ Ϫ2mb␻0␻

ᕡ The minus sign shows that F␪ is in
Ans.

the direction opposite to that shown
on the free-body diagram.

142

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

PROBLEMS
Introductory Problems
3/47 The small 0.6-kg block slides with a small amount of
friction on the circular path of radius 3 m in the vertical plane. If the speed of the block is 5 m/s as it
passes point A and 4 m/s as it passes point B, determine the normal force exerted on the block by the
surface at each of these two locations.

3/49 The 0.1-kg particle has a speed v ϭ 10 m/s as it
passes the 30Њ position shown. The coefﬁcient of kinetic friction between the particle and the verticalplane track is ␮k ϭ 0.20. Determine the magnitude
of the total force exerted by the track on the particle. What is the deceleration of the particle?
v

ρ=5m

30°
30°
3m

v
B
A
Problem 3/47

3/48 A 2-lb slider is propelled upward at A along the ﬁxed
curved bar which lies in a vertical plane. If the
slider is observed to have a speed of 10 ft/sec as it
passes position B, determine (a) the magnitude N of
the force exerted by the ﬁxed rod on the slider and
(b) the rate at which the speed of the slider is decreasing. Assume that friction is negligible.

B

Problem 3/49

3/50 The 4-oz slider has a speed v ϭ 3 ft/sec as it passes
point A of the smooth guide, which lies in a horizontal
plane. Determine the magnitude R of the force which
the guide exerts on the slider (a) just before it passes
point A of the guide and (b) as it passes point B.

8″

v

B
A
Problem 3/50

2′
A

Problem 3/48

30°

Article 3/5
3/51 Determine the proper bank angle ␪ for the airplane
ﬂying at 400 mi/hr and making a turn of 2-mile radius. Note that the force exerted by the air is normal to the supporting wing surface.

Problems

143

3/53 The hollow tube is pivoted about a horizontal axis
through point O and is made to rotate in the vertical plane with a constant counterclockwise angular
˙
velocity ␪ ϭ 3 rad/sec. If a 0.2-lb particle is sliding
in the tube toward O with a velocity of 4 ft/sec relative to the tube when the position ␪ ϭ 30Њ is passed,
calculate the magnitude N of the normal force exerted
by the wall of the tube on the particle at this instant.

Problem 3/53
Problem 3/51

3/52 The slotted arm rotates about its center in a hori˙
zontal plane at the constant angular rate ␪ ϭ 10
rad/sec and carries a 3.22-lb spring-mounted slider
which oscillates freely in the slot. If the slider has a
speed of 24 in./sec relative to the slot as it crosses
the center, calculate the horizontal side thrust P exerted by the slotted arm on the slider at this instant. Determine which side, A or B, of the slot is in
contact with the slider.

3/54 The member OA rotates about a horizontal axis
through O with a constant counterclockwise angular velocity ␻ ϭ 3 rad/sec. As it passes the position
␪ ϭ 0, a small block of mass m is placed on it at a
radial distance r ϭ 18 in. If the block is observed to
slip at ␪ ϭ 50Њ, determine the coefﬁcient of static
friction ␮s between the block and the member.

.

θ = 10 rad/sec

A
24 in./sec
B

Problem 3/52

Problem 3/54

3/55 In the design of a space station to operate outside
the earth’s gravitational ﬁeld, it is desired to give
the structure a rotational speed N which will simulate the effect of the earth’s gravity for members of
the crew. If the centers of the crew’s quarters are to
be located 12 m from the axis of rotation, calculate
the necessary rotational speed N of the space station in revolutions per minute.

N

12 m

Problem 3/55

144

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

3/56 A “swing ride” is shown in the ﬁgure. Calculate the
necessary angular velocity ␻ for the swings to assume an angle ␪ ϭ 35Њ with the vertical. Neglect the
mass of the cables and treat the chair and person as
one particle.
3.2 m

3/58 In order to simulate a condition of apparent “weightlessness” experienced by astronauts in an orbiting
spacecraft, a jet transport can change its direction
at the top of its ﬂight path by dropping its ﬂight˙
path direction at a prescribed rate ␪ for a short in˙ if the aircraft has a speed
terval of time. Specify ␪
v ϭ 600 km/h.

ω

600 km/h
θ

.
θ

5m

Problem 3/58

Problem 3/56

3/57 A Formula-1 car encounters a hump which has a
circular shape with smooth transitions at either
end. (a) What speed vB will cause the car to lose contact with the road at the topmost point B? (b) For a
speed vA ϭ 190 km/h, what is the normal force exerted by the road on the 640-kg car as it passes
point A?

3/59 The standard test to determine the maximum lateral acceleration of a car is to drive it around a
200-ft-diameter circle painted on a level asphalt surface. The driver slowly increases the vehicle speed
until he is no longer able to keep both wheel pairs
straddling the line. If this maximum speed is
35 mi/hr for a 3000-lb car, determine its lateral acceleration capability an in g’s and compute the magnitude F of the total friction force exerted by the
pavement on the car tires.

v
B

A

100 ft
10°

ρ = 300 m

Problem 3/57

Problem 3/59

Article 3/5
3/60 The car of Prob. 3/59 is traveling at 25 mi/hr when
the driver applies the brakes, and the car continues
to move along the circular path. What is the maximum deceleration possible if the tires are limited to
a total horizontal friction force of 2400 lb?

Representative Problems
3/61 The concept of variable banking for racetrack turns
is shown in the ﬁgure. If the two radii of curvature
are ␳A ϭ 300 ft and ␳B ϭ 320 ft for cars A and B, respectively, determine the maximum speed for each
car. The coefﬁcient of static friction is ␮s ϭ 0.90 for
both cars.
B

Problems

145

3/63 A small object is given an initial horizontal velocity
v0 at the bottom of a smooth slope. The angle ␪
made by the slope with the horizontal varies according to sin ␪ ϭ ks, where k is a constant and s is the
distance measured along the slope from the bottom.
Determine the maximum distance s which the object slides up the slope.
3/64 A 3220-lb car enters an S-curve at A with a speed of
60 mi/hr with brakes applied to reduce the speed to
45 mi/hr at a uniform rate in a distance of 300 ft
measured along the curve from A to B. The radius
of curvature of the path of the car at B is 600 ft. Calculate the total friction force exerted by the road on
the tires at B. The road at B lies in a horizontal
plane.
B

27°

A

A
300′
600′
22°
Problem 3/64

Problem 3/61

3/62 The small ball of mass m and its supporting wire become a simple pendulum when the horizontal cord
is severed. Determine the ratio k of the tension T in
the supporting wire immediately after the cord is
cut to that in the wire before the cord is cut.

θ

3/65 A pilot ﬂies an airplane at a constant speed of 600
km/h in the vertical circle of radius 1000 m. Calculate the force exerted by the seat on the 90-kg pilot
at point A and at point B.

Wire

Cord
m
Problem 3/62

Problem 3/65

146

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

3/66 The 30-Mg aircraft is climbing at the angle ␪ ϭ 15Њ
under a jet thrust T of 180 kN. At the instant represented, its speed is 300 km/h and is increasing at the
rate of 1.96 m/s2. Also ␪ is decreasing as the aircraft
begins to level off. If the radius of curvature of the
path at this instant is 20 km, compute the lift L and
drag D. (Lift L and drag D are the aerodynamic
forces normal to and opposite to the ﬂight direction,
respectively.)

3/68 A ﬂatbed truck going 100 km/h rounds a horizontal
curve of 300-m radius inwardly banked at 10Њ. The
coefﬁcient of static friction between the truck bed
and the 200-kg crate it carries is 0.70. Calculate the
friction force F acting on the crate.
ρ

θ

T
10°
Problem 3/66

3/67 The hollow tube assembly rotates about a vertical
˙
axis with angular velocity ␻ ϭ ␪ ϭ 4 rad/s and
¨
␻ ϭ ␪ ϭ Ϫ2 rad/s2. A small 0.2-kg slider P moves in˙
side the horizontal tube portion under the control of
the string which passes out the bottom of the assembly. If r ϭ0.8 m, ˙ ϭ Ϫ2 m/s, and ¨ ϭ 4 m/s2, deterr
r
mine the tension T in the string and the horizontal
force F␪ exerted on the slider by the tube.

Problem 3/68

3/69 Explain how to utilize the graduated pendulum to
measure the speed of a vehicle traveling in a horizontal circular arc of known radius r.

O
l

ω

θ

m
r

P

T

Problem 3/67

Problem 3/69

Article 3/5
3/70 The bowl-shaped device rotates about a vertical axis
with a constant angular velocity ␻. If the particle is
observed to approach a steady-state position ␪ ϭ 40Њ
in the presence of a very small amount of friction,
determine ␻. The value of r is 0.2 m.

r
r

ω

θ

m

3/71 The 2-kg slider ﬁts loosely in the smooth slot of the
disk, which rotates about a vertical axis through
point O. The slider is free to move slightly along the
slot before one of the wires becomes taut. If the disk
starts from rest at time t ϭ 0 and has a constant
clockwise angular acceleration of 0.5 rad/s2, plot the
tensions in wires 1 and 2 and the magnitude N of
the force normal to the slot as functions of time t for
the interval 0 Յ t Յ 5 s.
Problem 3/72

2
1

100 mm
45°
O

Problem 3/71

147

3/72 A 2-kg sphere S is being moved in a vertical plane
by a robotic arm. When the angle ␪ is 30Њ, the angular velocity of the arm about a horizontal axis
through O is 50 deg/s clockwise and its angular acceleration is 200 deg/s2 counterclockwise. In addition, the hydraulic element is being shortened at the
constant rate of 500 mm/s. Determine the necessary
minimum gripping force P if the coefﬁcient of static
friction between the sphere and the gripping surfaces is 0.50. Compare P with the minimum gripping
force Ps required to hold the sphere in static equilibrium in the 30Њ position.

Problem 3/70

··
θ

Problems

148

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

3/73 The rocket moves in a vertical plane and is being
propelled by a thrust T of 32 kN. It is also subjected
to an atmospheric resistance R of 9.6 kN. If the
rocket has a velocity of 3 km/s and if the gravitational acceleration is 6 m/s2 at the altitude of the
rocket, calculate the radius of curvature ␳ of its path
for the position described and the time-rate-ofchange of the magnitude v of the velocity of the
rocket. The mass of the rocket at the instant considered is 2000 kg.

3/75 A stretch of highway includes a succession of evenly
spaced dips and humps, the contour of which may
be represented by the relation y ϭ b sin (2␲x/L).
What is the maximum speed at which the car A can
go over a hump and still maintain contact with the
road? If the car maintains this critical speed, what is
the total reaction N under its wheels at the bottom
of a dip? The mass of the car is m.
y

A

b

R
x
Vertical

L
Problem 3/75

30°

3/76 Determine the speed v at which the race car will
have no tendency to slip sideways on the banked
track, that is, the speed at which there is no reliance
on friction. In addition, determine the minimum
and maximum speeds, using the coefﬁcient of static
friction ␮s ϭ 0.90. State any assumptions.

T
Problem 3/73

3/74 The robot arm is elevating and extending simulta˙
neously. At a given instant, ␪ ϭ 30Њ, ␪ ϭ 40 deg/s,
¨
␪ ϭ 120 deg/s2, l ϭ 0.5 m, ˙ ϭ 0.4 m/s, and ¨ ϭ Ϫ0.3
l
l
m/s2. Compute the radial and transverse forces Fr
and F␪ that the arm must exert on the gripped part
P, which has a mass of 1.2 kg. Compare with the case
of static equilibrium in the same position.
Problem 3/76

Problem 3/74

Article 3/5
3/77 Small steel balls, each with a mass of 65 g, enter the
semicircular trough in the vertical plane with a horizontal velocity of 4.1 m/s at A. Find the force R exerted by the trough on each ball in terms of ␪ and
the velocity vB of the balls at B. Friction is negligible.
vB

B

Problems

149

3/79 The spring-mounted 0.8-kg collar A oscillates along
the horizontal rod, which is rotating at the constant
˙
angular rate ␪ ϭ 6 rad/s. At a certain instant, r is
increasing at the rate of 800 mm/s. If the coefﬁcient
of kinetic friction between the collar and the rod is
0.40, calculate the friction force F exerted by the rod
on the collar at this instant.
Vertical
r

.

θ

320 mm
θ

A
vA = 4.1 m/s
Problem 3/79
A
Problem 3/77

3/78 The ﬂat circular disk rotates about a vertical axis
through O with a slowly increasing angular velocity
␻. Prior to rotation, each of the 0.5-kg sliding blocks
has the position x ϭ 25 mm with no force in its attached spring. Each spring has a stiffness of 400
N/m. Determine the value of x for each spring for a
steady speed of 240 rev/min. Also calculate the normal force N exerted by the side of the slot on the
block. Neglect any friction between the blocks and
the slots, and neglect the mass of the springs. (Hint:
Sum forces along and normal to the slot.)

3/80 The slotted arm revolves in the horizontal plane
about the ﬁxed vertical axis through point O. The
3-lb slider C is drawn toward O at the constant rate
of 2 in./sec by pulling the cord S. At the instant for
which r ϭ 9 in., the arm has a counterclockwise angular velocity ␻ ϭ 6 rad/sec and is slowing down
at the rate of 2 rad/sec2. For this instant, determine
the tension T in the cord and the magnitude N of
the force exerted on the slider by the sides of the
smooth radial slot. Indicate which side, A or B, of
the slot contacts the slider.

ω

A
x

O
x
A

80
mm

80
mm

Problem 3/78

Problem 3/80

150

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

3/81 A small coin is placed on the horizontal surface of
the rotating disk. If the disk starts from rest and is
¨
given a constant angular acceleration ␪ ϭ ␣, determine an expression for the number of revolutions N
through which the disk turns before the coin slips.
The coefﬁcient of static friction between the coin
and the disk is ␮s.

3/84 At the instant when ␪ ϭ 30Њ, the horizontal guide is
given a constant upward velocity v0 ϭ 2 m/s. For this
instant calculate the force N exerted by the ﬁxed
circular slot and the force P exerted by the horizontal slot on the 0.5-kg pin A. The width of the slots is
slightly greater than the diameter of the pin, and
friction is negligible.

Vertical

..

θ

r

250 mm
θ

v0

A
Problem 3/81

3/82 The rotating drum of a clothes dryer is shown in the
ﬁgure. Determine the angular velocity ⍀ of the drum
which results in loss of contact between the clothes
and the drum at ␪ ϭ 50Њ. Assume that the small
vanes prevent slipping until loss of contact.

B

Problem 3/84

3/85 The particle P is released at time t ϭ 0 from the position r ϭ r0 inside the smooth tube with no velocity
relative to the tube, which is driven at the constant
angular velocity ␻0 about a vertical axis. Determine
the radial velocity vr, the radial position r, and the
transverse velocity v␪ as functions of time t. Explain
why the radial velocity increases with time in the
absence of radial forces. Plot the absolute path of
the particle during the time it is inside the tube for
r0 ϭ 0.1 m, l ϭ 1 m, and ␻0 ϭ 1 rad/s.

Problem 3/82

3/83 A body at rest relative to the surface of the earth rotates with the earth and therefore moves in a circular path about the polar axis of the earth considered
ﬁxed. Derive an expression for the ratio k of the apparent weight of such a body as measured by a
spring scale at the equator (calibrated to read the
actual force applied) to the true weight of the body,
which is the absolute gravitational attraction to the
earth. The absolute acceleration due to gravity at
the equator is g ϭ 9.815 m/s2. The radius of the
earth at the equator is R ϭ 6378 km, and the angular velocity of the earth is ␻ ϭ 0.729(10Ϫ4) rad/s. If
the true weight is 100 N, what is the apparent measured weight WЈ?

Problem 3/85

Article 3/5
3/86 The small 5-oz slider A moves without appreciable
friction in the hollow tube, which rotates in a horizontal plane with a constant angular speed ⍀ ϭ 7
rad/sec. The slider is launched with an initial speed
r
˙0 ϭ 60 ft/sec relative to the tube at the inertial coordinates x ϭ 6 in. and y ϭ 0. Determine the magnitude P of the horizontal force exerted on the slider
by the tube just before the slider exits the tube.

Problems

151

3/88 Repeat the questions of the previous problem for the
revised system conﬁguration shown in the ﬁgure.

P=4N

0.8 m
O

A

45°

B

Problem 3/88
v

3/89 The 3000-lb car is traveling at 60 mi/hr on the
straight portion of the road, and then its speed is reduced uniformly from A to C, at which point it
comes to rest. Compute the magnitude F of the total
friction force exerted by the road on the car (a) just
before it passes point B, (b) just after it passes point
B, and (c) just before it stops at point C.

Problem 3/86

3/87 The two 0.2-kg sliders A and B move without friction in the horizontal-plane circular slot. Determine
the acceleration of each slider and the normal reaction force exerted on each when the system starts
from rest in the position shown and is acted upon by
the 4-N force P. Also ﬁnd the tension in the inextensible connecting cord AB.

Problem 3/89
P=4N

0.8 m
O

B
Problem 3/87

A

152

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

3/90 The spacecraft P is in the elliptical orbit shown. At
the instant represented, its speed is v ϭ 13,244 ft/sec.
r ˙ r
Determine the corresponding values of ˙, ␪ , ¨, and
¨
␪ . Use g ϭ 32.23 ft/sec2 as the acceleration of gravity on the surface of the earth and R ϭ 3959 mi as
the radius of the earth.

᭤3/92 The small pendulum of mass m is suspended from a
trolley which runs on a horizontal rail. The trolley
and pendulum are initially at rest with ␪ ϭ 0. If the
trolley is given a constant acceleration a ϭ g, determine the maximum angle ␪max through which the
pendulum swings. Also ﬁnd the tension T in the
cord in terms of ␪.

v
a

l

θ

m

Problem 3/92

Problem 3/90

᭤3/91 The slotted arm OA rotates about a horizontal axis
through point O. The 0.2-kg slider P moves with
negligible friction in the slot and is controlled by
the inextensible cable BP. For the instant under
˙
¨
consideration, ␪ ϭ 30Њ, ␻ ϭ ␪ ϭ 4 rad/s, ␪ ϭ 0, and
r ϭ 0.6 m. Determine the corresponding values of
the tension in cable BP and the force reaction R
perpendicular to the slot. Which side of the slot
contacts the slider?
A

r = 0.6 m

P

3m

A

θ

m
μ k = 0.20

ω

O

᭤3/93 A small object is released from rest at A and slides
with friction down the circular path. If the coefﬁcient of friction is 0.20, determine the velocity of the
object as it passes B. (Hint: Write the equations of
motion in the n- and t-directions, eliminate N, and
substitute v dv ϭ atr d␪. The resulting equation is a
linear nonhomogeneous differential equation of the
form dy/dx ϩ ƒ(x)y ϭ g(x), the solution of which is
well known.)

θ

B
B

0.3 m
Problem 3/91

Problem 3/93

Article 3/5
᭤3/94 The slotted arm OB rotates in a horizontal plane
about point O of the ﬁxed circular cam with constant
˙
angular velocity ␪ ϭ 15 rad/s. The spring has a stiffness of 5 kN/m and is uncompressed when ␪ ϭ 0.
The smooth roller A has a mass of 0.5 kg. Determine
the normal force N which the cam exerts on A and
also the force R exerted on A by the sides of the slot
when ␪ ϭ 45Њ. All surfaces are smooth. Neglect the
small diameter of the roller.

Problems

᭤3/96 The small cart is nudged with negligible velocity
from its horizontal position at A onto the parabolic
path, which lies in a vertical plane. Neglect friction
and show that the cart maintains contact with the
path for all values of k.
A
x

B

y = kx 2

θ

A

y
O
Problem 3/96

0.1
m

0.1
m

Problem 3/94

᭤3/95 A small collar of mass m is given an initial velocity
of magnitude v0 on the horizontal circular track fabricated from a slender rod. If the coefﬁcient of kinetic friction is ␮k, determine the distance traveled
before the collar comes to rest. (Hint: Recognize
that the friction force depends on the net normal
force.)

v0
Problem 3/95

153

154

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

SECTION B WORK AND ENERGY
3/6

Work and Kinetic Energy

In the previous two articles, we applied Newton’s second law F ϭ ma
to various problems of particle motion to establish the instantaneous relationship between the net force acting on a particle and the resulting acceleration of the particle. When we needed to determine the change in
velocity or the corresponding displacement of the particle, we integrated
the computed acceleration by using the appropriate kinematic equations.
There are two general classes of problems in which the cumulative
effects of unbalanced forces acting on a particle are of interest to us.
These cases involve (1) integration of the forces with respect to the displacement of the particle and (2) integration of the forces with respect to
the time they are applied. We may incorporate the results of these integrations directly into the governing equations of motion so that it becomes unnecessary to solve directly for the acceleration. Integration with
respect to displacement leads to the equations of work and energy, which
are the subject of this article. Integration with respect to time leads to
the equations of impulse and momentum, discussed in Section C.

dr
α

A′

r

F

r + dr

A

Deﬁnition of Work
We now develop the quantitative meaning of the term “work.”* Figure 3/2a shows a force F acting on a particle at A which moves along the
path shown. The position vector r measured from some convenient origin O locates the particle as it passes point A, and dr is the differential
displacement associated with an inﬁnitesimal movement from A to AЈ.
The work done by the force F during the displacement dr is deﬁned as
dU ϭ F ⅐ dr

O
(a)

Fn
F

Ft =

F co

sα

|
|dr
ds =
α
ds cos α

(b)

Figure 3/2

The magnitude of this dot product is dU ϭ F ds cos ␣, where ␣ is the
angle between F and dr and where ds is the magnitude of dr. This expression may be interpreted as the displacement multiplied by the force
component Ft ϭ F cos ␣ in the direction of the displacement, as represented by the dashed lines in Fig. 3/2b. Alternatively, the work dU may
be interpreted as the force multiplied by the displacement component
ds cos ␣ in the direction of the force, as represented by the full lines in
Fig. 3/2b.
With this deﬁnition of work, it should be noted that the component
Fn ϭ F sin ␣ normal to the displacement does no work. Thus, the work
dU may be written as
dU ϭ Ft ds
Work is positive if the working component Ft is in the direction of the
displacement and negative if it is in the opposite direction. Forces which
*The concept of work was also developed in the study of virtual work in Chapter 7 of Vol. 1
Statics.

Article 3/6

Work and Kinetic Energy

155

do work are termed active forces. Constraint forces which do no work
are termed reactive forces.

Units of Work
The SI units of work are those of force (N) times displacement (m)
or N ⅐ m. This unit is given the special name joule (J), which is deﬁned as
the work done by a force of 1 N acting through a distance of 1 m in the
direction of the force. Consistent use of the joule for work (and energy)
rather than the units N ⅐ m will avoid possible ambiguity with the units
of moment of a force or torque, which are also written N ⅐ m.
In the U.S. customary system, work has the units of ft-lb. Dimensionally, work and moment are the same. In order to distinguish between the two quantities, it is recommended that work be expressed as
foot pounds (ft-lb) and moment as pound feet (lb-ft). It should be noted
that work is a scalar as given by the dot product and involves the product of a force and a distance, both measured along the same line. Moment, on the other hand, is a vector as given by the cross product and
involves the product of force and distance measured at right angles to
the force.
Calculation of Work
During a ﬁnite movement of the point of application of a force, the
force does an amount of work equal to
Uϭ

͵

2

1

F ⅐ dr ϭ

͵

2

1

(Fx dx ϩ Fy dy ϩ Fz dz)

or
Uϭ

͵

s2

s1

Ft ds

In order to carry out this integration, it is necessary to know the relations between the force components and their respective coordinates or
the relation between Ft and s. If the functional relationship is not known
as a mathematical expression which can be integrated but is speciﬁed in
the form of approximate or experimental data, then we can compute the
work by carrying out a numerical or graphical integration as represented
by the area under the curve of Ft versus s, as shown in Fig. 3/3.

Ft

dU = Ft ds

s1

Examples of Work
When work must be calculated, we may always begin with the deﬁnition of work, U ϭ

͵ F ⅐ dr, insert appropriate vector expressions for the

force F and the differential displacement vector dr, and carry out the required integration. With some experience, simple work calculations,
such as those associated with constant forces, may be performed by inspection. We now formally compute the work associated with three frequently occurring forces: constant forces, spring forces, and weights.

s2

Figure 3/3

s

156

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

y
P

x
α

dr

L
1

2

Figure 3/4

(1) Work Associated with a Constant External Force. Consider
the constant force P applied to the body as it moves from position 1 to
position 2, Fig. 3/4. With the force P and the differential displacement
dr written as vectors, the work done on the body by the force is

͵
ϭ͵

U1-2 ϭ

2

F ⅐ dr ϭ

1
x2

x1

͵

2

1

[(P cos ␣)i ϩ (P sin ␣)j] ⅐ dx i

P cos ␣ dx ϭ P cos ␣(x2 Ϫ x1) ϭ PL cos ␣

(3/9)

As previously discussed, this work expression may be interpreted as the
force component P cos ␣ times the distance L traveled. Should ␣ be between 90Њ and 270Њ, the work would be negative. The force component
P sin ␣ normal to the displacement does no work.
(2) Work Associated with a Spring Force. We consider here the
common linear spring of stiffness k where the force required to stretch
or compress the spring is proportional to the deformation x, as shown in
Fig. 3/5a. We wish to determine the work done on the body by the spring
force as the body undergoes an arbitrary displacement from an initial
position x1 to a ﬁnal position x2. The force exerted by the spring on the
body is F ϭ Ϫkxi, as shown in Fig. 3/5b. From the deﬁnition of work, we
have
U1-2 ϭ

͵

2

1

͵ (Ϫkxi) ⅐ dx i ϭ Ϫ͵
2

F ⅐ dr ϭ

1

x2

x1

kx dx ϭ

1
k(x12 Ϫ x22)
2

(3/10)

If the initial position is the position of zero spring deformation so
that x1 ϭ 0, then the work is negative for any ﬁnal position x2 0. This
is veriﬁed by recognizing that if the body begins at the undeformed
spring position and then moves to the right, the spring force is to the
left; if the body begins at x1 ϭ 0 and moves to the left, the spring force is
to the right. On the other hand, if we move from an arbitrary initial po0 to the undeformed ﬁnal position x2 ϭ 0, we see that the
sition x1
work is positive. In any movement toward the undeformed spring position, the spring force and the displacement are in the same direction.
In the general case, of course, neither x1 nor x2 is zero. The magnitude of the work is equal to the shaded trapezoidal area of Fig. 3/5a. In
calculating the work done on a body by a spring force, care must be

Article 3/6

Force F required to
stretch or compress spring

F = kx

x1

x

x2

(a)

kx
dr
Undeformed
position

x

(b)

Figure 3/5

taken to ensure that the units of k and x are consistent. If x is in meters
(or feet), k must be in N/m (or lb/ft). In addition, be sure to recognize
that the variable x represents a deformation from the unstretched
spring length and not the total length of the spring.
The expression F ϭ kx is actually a static relationship which is true
only when elements of the spring have no acceleration. The dynamic behavior of a spring when its mass is accounted for is a fairly complex
problem which will not be treated here. We shall assume that the mass
of the spring is small compared with the masses of other accelerating
parts of the system, in which case the linear static relationship will not
involve appreciable error.
(3) Work Associated with Weight. Case (a) g ϭ constant. If the altitude variation is sufﬁciently small so that the acceleration of gravity g
may be considered constant, the work done by the weight mg of the
body shown in Fig. 3/6a as the body is displaced from an arbitrary altitude y1 to a ﬁnal altitude y2 is

͵ F ⅐ dr ϭ ͵ (Ϫmgj) ⅐ (dxi ϩ dyj)
ϭ Ϫmg ͵ dy ϭ Ϫmg( y Ϫ y )
2

U1-2 ϭ

2

1

1

y2

y1

2

1

(3/11)

Work and Kinetic Energy

157

158

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

2
dr
y

m

y2

mg

1

y1

x

(a)

R

Earth
me

er

Gmem
—–—
r2
m

dr

2

1
r1

r

r2

(b)

Figure 3/6
We see that horizontal movement does not contribute to this work. We
also note that if the body rises (perhaps due to other forces not shown),
then ( y2 Ϫ y1) Ͼ 0 and this work is negative. If the body falls, ( y2 Ϫ y1) Ͻ 0
and the work is positive.
Case (b) g
constant. If large changes in altitude occur, then the
weight (gravitational force) is no longer constant. We must therefore
use the gravitational law (Eq. 1/2) and express the weight as a variable
Gmem
, as indicated in Fig. 3/6b. Using the radial
force of magnitude F ϭ
r2
coordinate shown in the ﬁgure allows the work to be expressed as

U1-2 ϭ

͵

2

1

F ⅐ dr ϭ

͵

2

1

ϪGmem
2

r

er ⅐ dr er ϭ ϪGmem

΂r1 Ϫ r1 ΃ ϭ mgR ΂r1 Ϫ r1 ΃

ϭ Gmem

2

2

1

2

͵

r2

r1

dr
r2
(3/12)

1

where the equivalence Gme ϭ gR2 was established in Art. 1/5, with g
representing the acceleration of gravity at the earth’s surface and R representing the radius of the earth. The student should verify that if a
body rises to a higher altitude (r2 Ͼ r1), this work is negative, as it was
in case (a). If the body falls to a lower altitude (r2 Ͻ r1), the work is positive. Be sure to realize that r represents a radial distance from the center of the earth and not an altitude h ϭ r Ϫ R above the surface of the
earth. As in case (a), had we considered a transverse displacement in addition to the radial displacement shown in Fig. 3/6b, we would have concluded that the transverse displacement, because it is perpendicular to
the weight, does not contribute to the work.

Article 3/6

Work and Curvilinear Motion
We now consider the work done on a particle of mass m, Fig. 3/7,
moving along a curved path under the action of the force F, which
stands for the resultant ΣF of all forces acting on the particle. The position of m is speciﬁed by the position vector r, and its displacement along
its path during the time dt is represented by the change dr in its position vector. The work done by F during a ﬁnite movement of the particle from point 1 to point 2 is
U1-2 ϭ

͵

2

1

F ⅐ dr ϭ

͵

s1

U1-2 ϭ

͵

F ⅐ dr ϭ

1

͵

ma ⅐ dr

But a ⅐ dr ϭ at ds, where at is the tangential component of the acceleration of m. In terms of the velocity v of the particle, Eq. 2/3 gives at ds ϭ
v dv. Thus, the expression for the work of F becomes
U1-2 ϭ

͵

2

1

F ⅐ dr ϭ

͵

v2

v1

Fn
dr

2
s2
r

y

n

mv dv ϭ 1 m(v22 Ϫ v12)
2

(3/13)

where the integration is carried out between points 1 and 2 along the
curve, at which points the velocities have the magnitudes v1 and v2,
respectively.

Principle of Work and Kinetic Energy
The kinetic energy T of the particle is deﬁned as
T ϭ 1 mv2
2

(3/14)

and is the total work which must be done on the particle to bring it from
a state of rest to a velocity v. Kinetic energy T is a scalar quantity with
the units of N ⅐ m or joules (J) in SI units and ft-lb in U.S. customary
units. Kinetic energy is always positive, regardless of the direction of
the velocity.
Equation 3/13 may be restated as
U1-2 ϭ T2 Ϫ T1 ϭ ⌬T

F = ΣF

α

m

1

Ft
Path

O

2

1

t

s1

Ft ds

(3/15)

which is the work-energy equation for a particle. The equation states
that the total work done by all forces acting on a particle as it moves
from point 1 to point 2 equals the corresponding change in kinetic energy of the particle. Although T is always positive, the change ⌬T may

159

z

s2

where the limits specify the initial and ﬁnal end points of the motion.
When we substitute Newton’s second law F ϭ ma, the expression
for the work of all forces becomes
2

Work and Kinetic Energy

x

Figure 3/7

160

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

be positive, negative, or zero. When written in this concise form, Eq.
3/15 tells us that the work always results in a change of kinetic energy.
Alternatively, the work-energy relation may be expressed as the initial kinetic energy T1 plus the work done U1-2 equals the ﬁnal kinetic energy T2, or
T1 ϩ U1-2 ϭ T2

(3/15a)

When written in this form, the terms correspond to the natural sequence of events. Clearly, the two forms 3/15 and 3/15a are equivalent.

Advantages of the Work-Energy Method
We now see from Eq. 3/15 that a major advantage of the method of
work and energy is that it avoids the necessity of computing the acceleration and leads directly to the velocity changes as functions of the forces
which do work. Further, the work-energy equation involves only those
forces which do work and thus give rise to changes in the magnitude of
the velocities.
We consider now a system of two particles joined together by a connection which is frictionless and incapable of any deformation. The
forces in the connection are equal and opposite, and their points of application necessarily have identical displacement components in the direction of the forces. Therefore, the net work done by these internal
forces is zero during any movement of the system. Thus, Eq. 3/15 is applicable to the entire system, where U1-2 is the total or net work done on
the system by forces external to it and ⌬T is the change, T2 Ϫ T1, in the
total kinetic energy of the system. The total kinetic energy is the sum of
the kinetic energies of both elements of the system. We thus see that
another advantage of the work-energy method is that it enables us to
analyze a system of particles joined in the manner described without
dismembering the system.
Application of the work-energy method requires isolation of the particle or system under consideration. For a single particle you should
draw a free-body diagram showing all externally applied forces. For a
system of particles rigidly connected without springs, draw an activeforce diagram showing only those external forces which do work (active
forces) on the entire system.*
Power
The capacity of a machine is measured by the time rate at which it
can do work or deliver energy. The total work or energy output is not a
measure of this capacity since a motor, no matter how small, can deliver
a large amount of energy if given sufﬁcient time. On the other hand, a
large and powerful machine is required to deliver a large amount of energy in a short period of time. Thus, the capacity of a machine is rated
by its power, which is deﬁned as the time rate of doing work.
*The active-force diagram was introduced in the method of virtual work in statics. See
Chapter 7 of Vol. 1 Statics.

Article 3/6

Work and Kinetic Energy

161

Accordingly, the power P developed by a force F which does an
amount of work U is P ϭ dU/dt ϭ F ⅐ dr/dt. Because dr/dt is the velocity v
of the point of application of the force, we have
P ϭ F⅐v

(3/16)

Power is clearly a scalar quantity, and in SI it has the units of N ⅐ m/s ϭ J/s.
The special unit for power is the watt (W), which equals one joule per second (J/s). In U.S. customary units, the unit for mechanical power is the
horsepower (hp). These units and their numerical equivalences are
1 W ϭ 1 J/s
1 hp ϭ 550 ft-lb/sec ϭ 33,000 ft-lb/min

Efﬁciency
The ratio of the work done by a machine to the work done on the
machine during the same time interval is called the mechanical efﬁciency em of the machine. This deﬁnition assumes that the machine operates uniformly so that there is no accumulation or depletion of energy
within it. Efﬁciency is always less than unity since every device operates
with some loss of energy and since energy cannot be created within the
machine. In mechanical devices which involve moving parts, there will
always be some loss of energy due to the negative work of kinetic friction forces. This work is converted to heat energy which, in turn, is dissipated to the surroundings. The mechanical efﬁciency at any instant of
time may be expressed in terms of mechanical power P by
em ϭ

Poutput
Pinput

(3/17)

In addition to energy loss by mechanical friction, there may also be
electrical and thermal energy loss, in which case, the electrical efﬁciency
ee and thermal efﬁciency et are also involved. The overall efﬁciency e in
such instances is
e ϭ emeeet

Media Bakery

1 hp ϭ 746 W ϭ 0.746 kW

The power which must be produced
by a bike rider depends on the bicycle speed and the propulsive force
which is exerted by the supporting
surface on the rear wheel. The driving force depends on the slope
being negotiated.

162

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

SAMPLE PROBLEM 3/11
Calculate the velocity v of the 50-kg crate when it reaches the bottom of the
chute at B if it is given an initial velocity of 4 m/s down the chute at A. The coefﬁcient of kinetic friction is 0.30.

10 m

A

50 kg

B
15°

Solution.

The free-body diagram of the crate is drawn and includes the normal force R and the kinetic friction force F calculated in the usual manner. The
work done by the weight is positive, whereas that done by the friction force is
negative. The total work done on the crate during the motion is

ᕡ [U ϭ Fs]

50(9.81) N

U1-2 ϭ 50(9.81)(10 sin 15Њ) Ϫ 142.1(10) ϭ Ϫ151.9 J

The work-energy equation gives
[T1 ϩ U1-2 ϭ T2]

μ k R = 142.1 N

1
1
2
2
2 mv1 ϩ U1-2 ϭ 2 mv2
1
1
2
2
2 (50)(4) Ϫ 151.9 ϭ 2 (50)v2

R = 474 N

Helpful Hint

v2 ϭ 3.15 m/s

Ans.

Since the net work done is negative, we obtain a decrease in the kinetic energy.

ᕡ The work due to the weight depends
only on the vertical distance traveled.

SAMPLE PROBLEM 3/12
The ﬂatbed truck, which carries an 80-kg crate, starts from rest and attains
a speed of 72 km/h in a distance of 75 m on a level road with constant acceleration. Calculate the work done by the friction force acting on the crate during this
interval if the static and kinetic coefﬁcients of friction between the crate and the
truck bed are (a) 0.30 and 0.28, respectively, or (b) 0.25 and 0.20, respectively.
80(9.81) N

Solution.

If the crate does not slip on the bed, its acceleration will be that of
the truck, which is

[v2 ϭ 2as]

aϭ

2

v
ϭ
2s

(72/3.6)2
2(75)

a
F

ϭ 2.67 m/s2

80(9.81) N

Case (a). This acceleration requires a friction force on the block of
[F ϭ ma]

Helpful Hints

F ϭ 80(2.67) ϭ 213 N

which is less than the maximum possible value of ␮s N ϭ 0.30(80)(9.81) = 235 N.
Therefore, the crate does not slip and the work done by the actual static friction
force of 213 N is

ᕡ [U ϭ Fs]

U1-2 ϭ 213(75) ϭ 16 000 J

or

16 kJ

Ans.

Case (b). For ␮s ϭ 0.25, the maximum possible friction force is 0.25(80)(9.81) ϭ
196.2 N, which is slightly less than the value of 213 N required for no slipping.
Therefore, we conclude that the crate slips, and the friction force is governed by the
kinetic coefﬁcient and is F ϭ 0.20(80)(9.81) = 157.0 N. The acceleration becomes
[F ϭ ma]

a ϭ F/m ϭ 157.0/80 ϭ 1.962 m/s2

The distances traveled by the crate and the truck are in proportion to their accelerations. Thus, the crate has a displacement of (1.962/2.67)75 = 55.2 m, and
the work done by kinetic friction is

ᕢ [U ϭ Fs]

U1-2 ϭ 157.0(55.2) ϭ 8660 J

or

8.66 kJ

Ans.

ᕡ We note that static friction forces do
no work when the contacting surfaces are both at rest. When they are
in motion, however, as in this problem, the static friction force acting
on the crate does positive work and
that acting on the truck bed does
negative work.

ᕢ This problem shows that a kinetic
friction force can do positive work
when the surface which supports the
object and generates the friction
force is in motion. If the supporting
surface is at rest, then the kinetic
friction force acting on the moving
part always does negative work.

Article 3/6

Work and Kinetic Energy

SAMPLE PROBLEM 3/13

163

C 300 N

The 50-kg block at A is mounted on rollers so that it moves along the ﬁxed
horizontal rail with negligible friction under the action of the constant 300-N
force in the cable. The block is released from rest at A, with the spring to which
it is attached extended an initial amount x1 ϭ 0.233 m. The spring has a stiffness
k ϭ 80 N/m. Calculate the velocity v of the block as it reaches position B.

B

x1

Solution.

It will be assumed initially that the stiffness of the spring is small
enough to allow the block to reach position B. The active-force diagram for the
system composed of both block and cable is shown for a general position. The
spring force 80x and the 300-N tension are the only forces external to this system which do work on the system. The force exerted on the block by the rail, the
weight of the block, and the reaction of the small pulley on the cable do no work
on the system and are not included on the active-force diagram.

As the block moves from x1 ϭ 0.233 m to x2 ϭ 0.233 ϩ 1.2 ϭ 1.433 m, the
work done by the spring force acting on the block is

0.9 m

A

1.2 m
300 N

x
System
80x

ᕡ [U1-2 ϭ 1 k(x12 Ϫ x22)] U1-2 ϭ 1 80[0.2332 Ϫ (0.233 ϩ 1.2)2]
2
2
ϭ Ϫ80.0 J

Helpful Hint

The work done on the system by the constant 300-N force in the cable is the
force times the net horizontal movement of the cable over pulley C, which is
Ί(1.2)2 ϩ (0.9)2 Ϫ 0.9 ϭ 0.6 m. Thus, the work done is 300(0.6) ϭ 180 J. We now
apply the work-energy equation to the system and get
[T1 ϩ U1-2 ϭ T2]

0 Ϫ 80.0 ϩ 180 ϭ 1 (50)v2
2

v ϭ 2.00 m/s

Ans.

We take special note of the advantage to our choice of system. If the block
alone had constituted the system, the horizontal component of the 300-N cable
tension on the block would have to be integrated over the 1.2-m displacement.
This step would require considerably more effort than was needed in the solution as presented. If there had been appreciable friction between the block and
its guiding rail, we would have found it necessary to isolate the block alone in
order to compute the variable normal force and, hence, the variable friction
force. Integration of the friction force over the displacement would then be required to evaluate the negative work which it would do.

ᕡ Recall that this general formula is
valid for any initial and ﬁnal spring
deﬂections x1 and x2, positive (spring
in tension) or negative (spring in
compression). In deriving the springwork formula, we assumed the spring
to be linear, which is the case here.

164

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

SAMPLE PROBLEM 3/14
The power winch A hoists the 800-lb log up the 30Њ incline at a constant speed
of 4 ft/sec. If the power output of the winch is 6 hp, compute the coefﬁcient of kinetic friction ␮k between the log and the incline. If the power is suddenly increased
to 8 hp, what is the corresponding instantaneous acceleration a of the log?
From the free-body diagram of the log, we get N ϭ 800 cos 30Њ ϭ
693 lb, and the kinetic friction force becomes 693␮k. For constant speed, the
forces are in equilibrium so that

Solution.

T Ϫ 693␮k Ϫ 800 sin 30Њ ϭ 0

[ΣFx ϭ 0]

4f

t /s

ec

30°

T ϭ 693␮k ϩ 400

x
T

800 lb

The power output of the winch gives the tension in the cable

ᕡ [P ϭ Tv]

A

T ϭ P/v ϭ 6(550)/4 ϭ 825 lb
μk N

Substituting T gives
825 ϭ 693␮k ϩ 400

␮k ϭ 0.613

Ans.

30°
N

When the power is increased, the tension momentarily becomes
[P ϭ Tv]

Helpful Hints

T ϭ P/v ϭ 8(550)/4 ϭ 1100 lb

ᕡ Note the conversion from horse-

and the corresponding acceleration is given by
[ΣFx ϭ max]

power to ft-lb/sec.

800
1100 Ϫ 693(0.613) Ϫ 800 sin 30Њ ϭ
a
32.2

ᕢ

ᕢ As the speed increases, the accelera-

a ϭ 11.07 ft/sec2

Ans.

tion will drop until the speed stabilizes at a value higher than 4 ft/sec.

SAMPLE PROBLEM 3/15

v2

A satellite of mass m is put into an elliptical orbit around the earth. At point
A, its distance from the earth is h1 ϭ 500 km and it has a velocity v1 ϭ 30 000
km/h. Determine the velocity v2 of the satellite as it reaches point B, a distance
h2 ϭ 1200 km from the earth.

B
h2

A
R

Solution.

The satellite is moving outside of the earth’s atmosphere so that the
only force acting on it is the gravitational attraction of the earth. For the large
change in altitude of this problem, we cannot assume that the acceleration due
to gravity is constant. Rather, we must use the work expression, derived in this
article, which accounts for variation in the gravitational acceleration with altitude. Put another way, the work expression accounts for the variation of the
Gmme
weight F ϭ
with altitude. This work expression is
r2
U1-2 ϭ mgR2

r

B

r2

΂

1
1
2
2 1
2 mv1 ϩ mgR r Ϫ r
2
1

΃ϭ

A

1
2
2 mv2

v22 ϭ v12 ϩ 2gR2

r1

΂r1 Ϫ r1 ΃
2

O

1

Substituting the numerical values gives
v2

2

΂

30 000
ϭ
3.6

΃

2

ϩ

2
2(9.81)[(6371)(103)]

΂

10Ϫ3
10Ϫ3
Ϫ
6371 ϩ 1200 6371 ϩ 500

Helpful Hints

΃

ᕡ Note that the result is independent
of the mass m of the satellite.

ϭ 69.44(106) Ϫ 10.72(106) ϭ 58.73(106) (m/s)2
v2 ϭ 7663 m/s

or

F

1

The work-energy equation T1 ϩ U1-2 ϭ T2 gives

ᕡ
ᕢ

h1

O

΂r1 Ϫ r1 ΃
2

v1

v2 ϭ 7663(3.6) ϭ 27 590 km/h

Ans.

ᕢ Consult Table D/2, Appendix D, to
ﬁnd the radius R of the earth.

Article 3/6

PROBLEMS
Introductory Problems
3/97 The spring is unstretched when x ϭ 0. If the body
moves from the initial position x1 ϭ 100 mm to the
ﬁnal position x2 ϭ 200 mm, (a) determine the work
done by the spring on the body and (b) determine
the work done on the body by its weight.

Problems

165

3/100 The 1.5-lb collar slides with negligible friction on
the ﬁxed rod in the vertical plane. If the collar
starts from rest at A under the action of the constant 2-lb horizontal force, calculate its velocity v
as it hits the stop at B.
30″

A
2 lb

4 kN
/m

x

15″

7 kg
B

20°

Problem 3/100

Problem 3/97

3/98 The small body has a speed ␷A ϭ 5 m/s at point A.
Neglecting friction, determine its speed ␷B at point
B after it has risen 0.8 m. Is knowledge of the shape
of the track necessary?

5 m/s

0.8 m

3/101 In the design of a spring bumper for a 3500-lb car,
it is desired to bring the car to a stop from a speed
of 5 mi/hr in a distance equal to 6 in. of spring deformation. Specify the required stiffness k for each
of the two springs behind the bumper. The springs
are undeformed at the start of impact.

B

A
Problem 3/98

3/99 The 64.4-lb crate slides down the curved path in the
vertical plane. If the crate has a velocity of 3 ft/sec
down the incline at A and a velocity of 25 ft/sec at B,
compute the work Uƒ done on the crate by friction
during the motion from A to B.
A
3 ft/sec

20′
B

30′
Problem 3/99

25 ft/sec

5 mi/hr

Problem 3/101

3/102 A two-engine jet transport has a loaded weight of
90,000 lb and a forward thrust of 9800 lb per engine
during takeoff. If the transport requires 4800 ft of
level runway starting from rest to become airborne
at a speed of 140 knots (1 knot ϭ 1.151 mi/hr), determine the average resistance R to motion over the
runway length due to drag (air resistance) and mechanical retardation by the landing gear.

166

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

3/103 The small collar of mass m is released from rest at
A and slides down the curved rod in the vertical
plane with negligible friction. Express the velocity
v of the collar as it strikes the base at B in terms of
the given conditions.
b
A

3/105 The two small 0.2-kg sliders are connected by a
light rigid bar and are constrained to move without friction in the circular slot. The force P ϭ 12 N
is constant in magnitude and direction and is applied to the moving slider A. The system starts
from rest in the position shown. Determine the
speed of slider A as it passes the initial position of
slider B if (a) the circular track lies in a horizontal
plane and if (b) the circular track lies in a vertical
plane. The value of R is 0.8 m.

h
R

P
B

30°

O

A

Problem 3/103

3/104 For the sliding collar of Prob. 3/103, if m ϭ 0.5 kg,
b ϭ 0.8 m, and h ϭ 1.5 m, and if the velocity of the
collar as it strikes the base B is 4.70 m/s after release of the collar from rest at A, calculate the
work Q of friction. What happens to the energy
which is lost?

B
Problem 3/105

3/106 The man and his bicycle together weigh 200 lb.
What power P is the man developing in riding up a
5-percent grade at a constant speed of 15 mi/hr?

15 mi/ hr

5
100

Problem 3/106

Article 3/6
3/107 The system is released from rest with no slack in
the cable and with the spring unstretched. Determine the distanced s traveled by the 10-kg cart before it comes to rest (a) if m approaches zero and
(b) if m ϭ 2 kg. Assume no mechanical interference.

Problems

167

3/109 The 2-kg collar is released from rest at A and slides
down the inclined ﬁxed rod in the vertical plane.
The coefﬁcient of kinetic friction is 0.40. Calculate
(a) the velocity v of the collar as it strikes the
spring and (b) the maximum deﬂection x of the
spring.

A

kg
10
25°

2 kg
0.5 m
m

μ k = 0.40

60°

k = 1.6 kN/m

k = 125 N/m
Problem 3/109

Problem 3/107

3/108 The system is released from rest with no slack in
the cable and with the spring stretched 200 mm.
Determine the distance s traveled by the 10-kg
cart before it comes to rest (a) if m approaches
zero and (b) if m ϭ 2 kg. Assume no mechanical
interference.

3/110 Each of the two systems is released from rest. Calculate the velocity v of each 50-lb cylinder after the
40-lb cylinder has dropped 6 ft. The 20-lb cylinder
of case (a) is replaced by a 20-lb force in case (b).

40
lb

10

kg

50
lb

20
lb

25°

40
lb

20 lb
(a)

k = 125 N/m

Problem 3/108

(b)
Problem 3/110

m

50
lb

168

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

3/111 The 120-lb woman jogs up the ﬂight of stairs in
5 seconds. Determine her average power output.
Convert all given information to SI units and repeat your calculation.

Representative Problems
3/113 An escalator handles a steady load of 30 people per
minute in elevating them from the ﬁrst to the second ﬂoor through a vertical rise of 24 ft. The average person weighs 140 lb. If the motor which
drives the unit delivers 4 hp, calculate the mechanical efﬁciency e of the system.

9′

Problem 3/111
24′

3/112 The 4-kg ball and the attached light rod rotate in
the vertical plane about the ﬁxed axis at O. If the
assembly is released from rest at ␪ ϭ 0 and moves
under the action of the 60-N force, which is maintained normal to the rod, determine the velocity v
of the ball as ␪ approaches 90Њ. Treat the ball as a
particle.

300
mm
200
mm

O

θ

4 kg

Problem 3/113

3/114 A 1200-kg car enters an 8-percent downhill grade
at a speed of 100 km/h. The driver applies her
brakes to bring the car to a speed of 25 km/h in a
distance of 0.5 km measured along the road. Calculate the energy loss Q dissipated from the brakes
in the form of heat. Neglect any friction losses
from other causes such as air resistance.

A

3/115 The 15-lb cylindrical collar is released from rest in
the position shown and drops onto the spring. Calculate the velocity v of the cylinder when the
spring has been compressed 2 in.
60 N
B

Problem 3/112
A

15 lb

18″

k = 80 lb/in.

Problem 3/115

Article 3/6
3/116 Determine the constant force P required to cause
the 0.5-kg slider to have a speed v2 ϭ 0.8 m/s at position 2. The slider starts from rest at position 1
and the unstretched length of the spring of modulus k ϭ 250 N/m is 200 mm. Neglect friction.
2
200
mm

1
250
mm

Problems

169

3/118 The motor unit A is used to elevate the 300-kg
cylinder at a constant rate of 2 m/s. If the power
meter B registers an electrical input of 2.20 kW,
calculate the combined electrical and mechanical
efﬁciency e of the system.

P

200
mm
m
250 m

100 kg
k

300 kg

m
A

B

15°

2 m/s

Problem 3/116

3/117 In a design test of penetration resistance, a 12-g
bullet is ﬁred through a 400-mm stack of ﬁbrous
plates with an entering velocity of 600 m/s. If the
bullet emerges with a velocity of 300 m/s, calculate
the average resistance R to penetration. What is
the loss ⌬Q of energy and where does it go?
400 mm

600 m/s

Problem 3/118

3/119 A 1700-kg car starts from rest at position A and accelerates uniformly up the incline, reaching a
speed of 100 km/h at position B. Determine the
power required just before the car reaches position
B and also the power required when the car is
halfway between positions A and B. Calculate the
net tractive force F required.
B

300 m/s
A

110 m

vB = 100 km/h

vA = 0
6
100
Problem 3/117

Problem 3/119

170

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

3/120 Two 425,000-lb locomotives pull 50 200,000-lb coal
hoppers. The train starts from rest and accelerates
uniformly to a speed of 40 mi/hr over a distance of
8000 ft on a level track. The constant rolling resistance of each car is 0.005 times its weight. Neglect
all other retarding forces and assume that each locomotive contributes equally to the tractive force.
Determine (a) the tractive force exerted by each locomotive at 20 mi/hr, (b) the power required from
each locomotive at 20 mi/hr, (c) the power required
from each locomotive as the train speed approaches 40 mi/hr, and (d) the power required
from each locomotive if the train cruises at a
steady 40 mi/hr.

3/122 A projectile is launched from the north pole with
an initial vertical velocity v0. What value of v0 will
result in a maximum altitude of R/2? Neglect aerodynamic drag and use g ϭ 9.825 m/s2 as the surfacelevel acceleration due to gravity.
v0

R

50 coal hoppers
Problem 3/122
Problem 3/120

3/121 The 0.6-lb slider moves freely along the ﬁxed
curved rod from A to B in the vertical plane under
the action of the constant 1.3-lb tension in the
cord. If the slider is released from rest at A, calculate its velocity v as it reaches B.

3/123 The spring is compressed an amount ␦ ϭ 80 mm
and the system is released from rest. Determine
the power supplied by the spring to the 4-kg cart
(a) just after release, (b) as the cart passes the position for which the spring is compressed an
amount ␦/2, and (c) as the cart passes the equilibrium position.

B

Unstretched position

6″

δ
k = 3.5 kN/m
4 kg
10″

A

1.3 lb
Problem 3/123
24″
Problem 3/121

Article 3/6
3/124 In a test to determine the crushing characteristics
of a packing material, a steel cone of mass m is released, falls a distance h, and then penetrates the
material. The radius of the cone is proportional to
the square of the distance from its tip. The resistance R of the material to penetration depends on
the cross-sectional area of the penetrating object
and thus is proportional to the fourth power of the
cone penetration distance x, or R ϭ kx4. If the cone
comes to rest at a distance x ϭ d, determine the
constant k in terms of the test conditions and results. Utilize a single application of the workenergy equation.

Problems

171

3/126 The 0.5-kg collar slides with negligible friction
along the ﬁxed spiral rod, which lies in the vertical
plane. The rod has the shape of the spiral r ϭ 0.3␪,
where r is in meters and ␪ is in radians. The collar
is released from rest at A and slides to B under the
action of a constant radial force T ϭ 10 N. Calculate the velocity v of the slider as it reaches B.
y

T

T

A

θ

r
B

T

x

h
Problem 3/126
x

Problem 3/124

3/125 The small slider of mass m is released from rest
while in position A and then slides along the vertical-plane track. The track is smooth from A to D
and rough (coefﬁcient of kinetic friction ␮k) from
point D on. Determine (a) the normal force NB exerted by the track on the slider just after it passes
point B, (b) the normal force NC exerted by the
track on the slider as it passes the bottom point C,
and (c) the distance s traveled along the incline
past point D before the slider stops.

3/127 The 300-lb carriage has an initial velocity of 9 ft/sec
down the incline at A, when a constant force of 110
lb is applied to the hoisting cable as shown. Calculate the velocity of the carriage when it reaches B.
Show that in the absence of friction this velocity is
independent of whether the initial velocity of the
carriage at A was up or down the incline.
110 lb

9
vA =

ec
ft/s
lb
300
10′

5

B

A

12

A
m

Problem 3/127

2R
s
B

μk
D

R
30°
C
Problem 3/125

172

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

3/128 Each of the sliders A and B has a mass of 2 kg and
moves with negligible friction in its respective
guide, with y being in the vertical direction. A 20-N
horizontal force is applied to the midpoint of the
connecting link of negligible mass, and the assembly is released from rest with ␪ ϭ 0. Calculate the
velocity vA with which A strikes the horizontal
guide when ␪ ϭ 90Њ.

3/130 The two 0.2-kg sliders A and B are connected by a
light rigid bar of length L ϭ 0.5 m. If the system is
released from rest while in the position shown
with the spring undeformed, determine the maximum compression ␦ of the spring. Note the presence of a constant 0.14-MPa air pressure acting on
one 500-mm2 side of slider A. Neglect friction. The
motion occurs in a vertical plane.

y

A
A
0.2 m

L

θ

k = 1.2 kN/m

20 N

30°

60°
0.2 m
x

B
Problem 3/130

B

Problem 3/128

3/129 The ball is released from position A with a velocity
of 3 m/s and swings in a vertical plane. At the bottom position, the cord strikes the ﬁxed bar at B,
and the ball continues to swing in the dashed arc.
Calculate the velocity vC of the ball as it passes position C.

60°

3/131 Once under way at a steady speed, the 1000-kg elevator A rises at the rate of 1 story (3 m) per second. Determine the power input Pin into the motor
unit M if the combined mechanical and electrical
efﬁciency of the system is e ϭ 0.8.
M

1.2 m

0.8 m
A
C

B

3 m/s

A

Problem 3/129
Problem 3/131

Article 3/6
3/132 The 7-kg collar A slides with negligible friction on
the ﬁxed vertical shaft. When the collar is released
from rest at the bottom position shown, it moves
up the shaft under the action of the constant force
F ϭ 200 N applied to the cable. Calculate the stiffness k which the spring must have if its maximum
compression is to be limited to 75 mm. The position of the small pulley at B is ﬁxed.

225
mm

173

3/134 The spring attached to the 10-kg mass is nonlinear, having the force–deﬂection relationship shown
in the ﬁgure, and is unstretched when x ϭ 0. If the
mass is moved to the position x ϭ 100 mm and released from rest, determine its velocity v when
x ϭ 0. Determine the corresponding velocity vЈ if
the spring were linear according to F ϭ 4x, where
x is in meters and the force F is in kilonewtons.
Force F, kN

k

Problems

Linear, F = 4x
Nonlinear, F = 4x – 120x 3

B

Deflection x, m
450 mm
x

F
10 kg
75 mm

A

μ s = 0.25

μ k = 0.20

Problem 3/134
Problem 3/132

3/133 Calculate the horizontal velocity v with which the
48-lb carriage must strike the spring in order to
compress it a maximum of 4 in. The spring is
known as a “hardening” spring, since its stiffness
increases with deﬂection as shown in the accompanying graph.

3/135 The 6-kg cylinder is released from rest in the position shown and falls on the spring, which has been
initially precompressed 50 mm by the light strap
and restraining wires. If the stiffness of the spring
is 4 kN/m, compute the additional deﬂection ␦ of
the spring produced by the falling cylinder before
it rebounds.
6 kg

3x2

F, lb
x
60x

48 lb
0
0

x, in.

x 4

100 mm

δ

Problem 3/133

Problem 3/135

174

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

3/136 Extensive testing of an experimental 2000-lb automobile reveals the aerodynamic drag force FD and
the total nonaerodynamic rolling-resistance force
FR to be as shown in the plot. Determine (a) the
power required for steady speeds of 30 and 60 mi/hr
on a level road, (b) the power required for a steady
speed of 60 mi/hr both up and down a 6-percent incline, and (c) the steady speed at which no power is
required going down the 6-percent incline.
80

60

3/138 The 50-lb slider in the position shown has an initial velocity v0 ϭ 2 ft/sec on the inclined rail and
slides under the inﬂuence of gravity and friction.
The coefﬁcient of kinetic friction between the
slider and the rail is 0.50. Calculate the velocity of
the slider as it passes the position for which the
spring is compressed a distance x ϭ 4 in. The
spring offers a compressive resistance C and is
known as a “hardening” spring, since its stiffness
increases with deﬂection as shown in the accompanying graph.

FR (constant)

v0 = 2 ft/sec
50
lb

Force, lb 40

μ k = 0.50

FD (parabolic)
C, lb

3′

20

0
0

20

40

60

9x2
100x

80
x

Speed v, mi/hr
Problem 3/136

3/137 The three springs of equal moduli are unstretched
when the cart is released from rest in the position
x ϭ 0. If k ϭ 120 N/m and m ϭ 10 kg, determine
(a) the speed v of the cart when x ϭ 50 mm, (b) the
maximum displacement xmax of the cart, and (c) the
steady-state displacement xss that would exist after
all oscillations cease.

x

k
m

k
k
20°

Problem 3/137

60°
x, in.

Problem 3/138

x

Article 3/7

3/7

Potential Energy

Potential Energy

In the previous article on work and kinetic energy, we isolated a
particle or a combination of joined particles and determined the work
done by gravity forces, spring forces, and other externally applied forces
acting on the particle or system. We did this to evaluate U in the workenergy equation. In the present article we will introduce the concept of
potential energy to treat the work done by gravity forces and by spring
forces. This concept will simplify the analysis of many problems.

Gravitational Potential Energy
We consider ﬁrst the motion of a particle of mass m in close proximity to the surface of the earth, where the gravitational attraction
(weight) mg is essentially constant, Fig. 3/8a. The gravitational potential energy Vg of the particle is deﬁned as the work mgh done against the
gravitational ﬁeld to elevate the particle a distance h above some arbitrary reference plane (called a datum), where Vg is taken to be zero.
Thus, we write the potential energy as
Vg ϭ mgh

Vg = mgh
h
mg
Vg = 0

(3/18)

This work is called potential energy because it may be converted
into energy if the particle is allowed to do work on a supporting body
while it returns to its lower original datum plane. In going from one
level at h ϭ h1 to a higher level at h ϭ h2, the change in potential energy
becomes

(a)

m

mgR 2
Vg = – —–—
r

⌬Vg ϭ mg(h2 Ϫ h1) ϭ mg⌬h
The corresponding work done by the gravitational force on the particle
is Ϫmg⌬h. Thus, the work done by the gravitational force is the negative of the change in potential energy.
When large changes in altitude in the ﬁeld of the earth are encountered, Fig. 3/8b, the gravitational force Gmme /r2 ϭ mgR2/r2 is no longer
constant. The work done against this force to change the radial position
of the particle from r1 to r2 is the change (Vg)2 Ϫ (Vg)1 in gravitational
potential energy, which is

͵

r2

r1

mgR2

΂

΃

mgR2
r

(3/19)

In going from r1 to r2, the corresponding change in potential energy is

΂r1 Ϫ r1 ΃
1

R

Figure 3/8

It is customary to take (Vg)2 ϭ 0 when r2 ϭ ȍ, so that with this
datum we have

⌬Vg ϭ mgR2

Earth
me

(b)

dr
1
1
ϭ mgR2
Ϫ
ϭ (Vg)2 Ϫ (Vg)1
r1 r2
r2

Vg ϭ Ϫ

r

mgR 2
—–—
r2

2

175

176

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

which, again, is the negative of the work done by the gravitational force.
We note that the potential energy of a given particle depends only on its
position, h or r, and not on the particular path it followed in reaching
that position.

Elastic Potential Energy
The second example of potential energy occurs in the deformation of
an elastic body, such as a spring. The work which is done on the spring to
deform it is stored in the spring and is called its elastic potential energy Ve.
This energy is recoverable in the form of work done by the spring on the
body attached to its movable end during the release of the deformation of
the spring. For the one-dimensional linear spring of stiffness k, which we
discussed in Art. 3/6 and illustrated in Fig. 3/5, the force supported by the
spring at any deformation x, tensile or compressive, from its undeformed
position is F ϭ kx. Thus, we deﬁne the elastic potential energy of the
spring as the work done on it to deform it an amount x, and we have
Ve ϭ

͵

x

0

kx dx ϭ 1 kx2
2

(3/20)

If the deformation, either tensile or compressive, of a spring increases from x1 to x2 during the motion, then the change in potential energy of the spring is its ﬁnal value minus its initial value or
⌬Ve ϭ 1 k(x22 Ϫ x12)
2
which is positive. Conversely, if the deformation of a spring decreases
during the motion interval, then the change in potential energy of the
spring becomes negative. The magnitude of these changes is represented by the shaded trapezoidal area in the F-x diagram of Fig. 3/5a.
Because the force exerted on the spring by the moving body is equal
and opposite to the force F exerted by the spring on the body, it follows
that the work done on the spring is the negative of the work done on the
body. Therefore, we may replace the work U done by the spring on the
body by Ϫ⌬Ve, the negative of the potential energy change for the spring,
provided the spring is now included within the system.

Work-Energy Equation
With the elastic member included in the system, we now modify the
work-energy equation to account for the potential-energy terms. If UЈ
1-2
stands for the work of all external forces other than gravitational forces
and spring forces, we may write Eq. 3/15 as UЈ ϩ (Ϫ⌬Vg) ϩ (Ϫ⌬Ve) ϭ
1-2
⌬T or
UЈ ϭ ⌬T ϩ⌬V
1-2

(3/21)

where ⌬V is the change in total potential energy, gravitational plus elastic.
This alternative form of the work-energy equation is often far more
convenient to use than Eq. 3/15, since the work of both gravity and spring
forces is accounted for by focusing attention on the end-point positions of

Article 3/7

the particle and on the end-point lengths of the elastic spring. The path
followed between these end-point positions is of no consequence in the
evaluation of ⌬Vg and ⌬Ve.
Note that Eq. 3/21 may be rewritten in the equivalent form
T1 ϩ V1 ϩ UЈ ϭ T2 ϩ V2
1-2

(3/21a)

To help clarify the difference between the use of Eqs. 3/15 and 3/21,
Fig. 3/9 shows schematically a particle of mass m constrained to move
along a ﬁxed path under the action of forces F1 and F2, the gravitational
force W ϭ mg, the spring force F, and the normal reaction N. In Fig.
3/9b, the particle is isolated with its free-body diagram. The work done
by each of the forces F1, F2, W, and the spring force F ϭ kx is evaluated,
say, from A to B, and equated to the change ⌬T in kinetic energy using
Eq. 3/15. The constraint reaction N, if normal to the path, will do no
work. The alternative approach is shown in Fig. 3/9c, where the spring
is included as a part of the isolated system. The work done during the
interval by F1 and F2 is the UЈ -term of Eq. 3/21 with the changes in
1-2
elastic and gravitational potential energies included on the energy side
of the equation.
We note with the first approach that the work done by F ϭ kx
could require a somewhat awkward integration to account for the
changes in magnitude and direction of F as the particle moves from A
F1
B
A

F2

(a)

N

F1

F1
System
Vg = mgh
F2

F2
h

F = kx
W = mg

Vg = 0

U1-2 = ΔT
U′1-2 = ΔT + ΔV
(c)

(b)

Figure 3/9

Potential Energy

177

178

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

to B. With the second approach, however, only the initial and final
lengths of the spring are required to evaluate ⌬Ve. This greatly simplifies the calculation.
For problems where the only forces are gravitational, elastic, and
nonworking constraint forces, the UЈ-term of Eq. 3/21a is zero, and the
energy equation becomes
T1 ϩ V1 ϭ T2 ϩ V2

E1 ϭ E 2

or

(3/22)

where E ϭ T ϩ V is the total mechanical energy of the particle and its
attached spring. When E is constant, we see that transfers of energy between kinetic and potential may take place as long as the total mechanical energy T ϩ V does not change. Equation 3/22 expresses the law of
conservation of dynamical energy.

y

2

F

Conservative Force Fields*
We have observed that the work done against a gravitational or an
elastic force depends only on the net change of position and not on the
particular path followed in reaching the new position. Forces with this
characteristic are associated with conservative force ﬁelds, which possess
an important mathematical property.
Consider a force ﬁeld where the force F is a function of the coordinates, Fig. 3/10. The work done by F during a displacement dr of its
point of application is dU ϭ F ⅐ dr. The total work done along its path
from 1 to 2 is

dr

Uϭ

r

The integral

1

z

x

͵ F ⅐ dr ϭ ͵ (F dx ϩ F dy ϩ F dz)
x

y

z

͵ F ⅐ dr is a line integral which depends, in general, on the

particular path followed between any two points 1 and 2 in space. If,
however, F ⅐ dr is an exact differential† ϪdV of some scalar function V of
the coordinates, then

Figure 3/10
U1-2 ϭ

͵

V2

V1

ϪdV ϭ Ϫ(V2 Ϫ V1)

(3/23)

which depends only on the end points of the motion and which is thus
independent of the path followed. The minus sign before dV is arbitrary
but is chosen to agree with the customary designation of the sign of potential energy change in the gravity ﬁeld of the earth.
If V exists, the differential change in V becomes
dV ϭ

ѨV
ѨV
ѨV
dx ϩ
dy ϩ
dz
Ѩx
Ѩy
Ѩz

*Optional.
†

Recall that a function d␾ ϭ P dx ϩ Q dy ϩ R dz is an exact differential in the coordinates
x-y-z if
ѨQ ѨR
ѨP ѨQ
ѨP ѨR
ϭ
ϭ
ϭ
Ѩy
Ѩx
Ѩz
Ѩx
Ѩz
Ѩy

Article 3/7

Comparison with ϪdV ϭ F ⅐ dr = Fx dx ϩ Fy dy ϩ Fz dz gives us
Fx ϭ Ϫ

ѨV
Ѩx

Fy ϭ Ϫ

ѨV
Ѩy

Fz ϭ Ϫ

ѨV
Ѩz

The force may also be written as the vector
F ϭ Ϫ١V

(3/24)

where the symbol ١ stands for the vector operator “del”, which is
١ϭi

Ѩ
Ѩ
Ѩ
ϩj
ϩk
Ѩx
Ѩy
Ѩz

The quantity V is known as the potential function, and the expression
١V is known as the gradient of the potential function.
When force components are derivable from a potential as described,
the force is said to be conservative, and the work done by F between any
two points is independent of the path followed.

Potential Energy

179

180

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

SAMPLE PROBLEM 3/16

24″

The 6-lb slider is released from rest at position 1 and slides with negligible
friction in a vertical plane along the circular rod. The attached spring has a stiffness of 2 lb/in. and has an unstretched length of 24 in. Determine the velocity of
the slider as it passes position 2.

Solution.

The work done by the weight and the spring force on the slider will
be treated using potential-energy methods. The reaction of the rod on the slider
is normal to the motion and does no work. Hence, UЈ ϭ 0. We deﬁne the datum
1-2
to be at the level of position 1, so that the gravitational potential energies are

ᕡ

1
24″

2
k=

n.
lb /i

6 lb
2

v2

V1 ϭ 0
V2 ϭ Ϫmgh ϭ Ϫ6

Helpful Hint

΂24΃ ϭ Ϫ12 ft-lb
12

ᕡ Note that if we evaluated the work

The initial and ﬁnal elastic (spring) potential energies are
1

1

1

1

V1 ϭ 2 kx12 ϭ 2 (2)(12)
V2 ϭ 2 kx22 ϭ 2 (2)(12)

΂24΃
12

2

ϭ 48 ft-lb

΂24Ί2 Ϫ 24΃
12
12

2

ϭ 8.24 ft-lb

Substitution into the alternative work-energy equation yields
[T1 ϩ V1 ϩ UЈ ϭ T2 ϩ V2]
1-2

0 ϩ 48 ϩ 0 ϭ

΂ ΃

1 6
v 2 Ϫ 12 ϩ 8.24
2 32.2 2

v2 ϭ 23.6 ft/sec

Ans.

done by the spring force acting on
the slider by means of the integral
͐F ⅐ dr, it would necessitate a lengthy
computation to account for the
change in the magnitude of the force,
along with the change in the angle
between the force and the tangent to
the path. Note further that v2 depends only on the end conditions of
the motion and does not require
knowledge of the shape of the path.

SAMPLE PROBLEM 3/17
The 10-kg slider moves with negligible friction up the inclined guide. The
attached spring has a stiffness of 60 N/m and is stretched 0.6 m in position A,
where the slider is released from rest. The 250-N force is constant and the pulley
offers negligible resistance to the motion of the cord. Calculate the velocity vC of
the slider as it passes point C.

250 N

B

C

Solution.

ᕡ
ᕢ

The slider and inextensible cord together with the attached spring
will be analyzed as a system, which permits the use of Eq. 3/21a. The only nonpotential force doing work on this system is the 250-N tension applied to the
cord. While the slider moves from A to C, the point of application of the 250-N
force moves a distance of AB Ϫ BC or 1.5 Ϫ 0.9 ϭ 0.6 m.
UЈ ϭ 250(0.6) ϭ 150 J
A-C

0.9

vC

A
1.2

m

30°

We deﬁne a datum at position A so that the initial and ﬁnal gravitational potential energies are
VA ϭ 0

VC ϭ mgh ϭ 10(9.81)(1.2 sin 30Њ) ϭ 58.9 J
Helpful Hints

The initial and ﬁnal elastic potential energies are
1

ᕡ Do not hesitate to use subscripts tai-

1

VA ϭ 2 kxA2 ϭ 2 (60)(0.6)2 ϭ 10.8 J

lored to the problem at hand. Here
we use A and C rather than 1 and 2.

1
1
VC ϭ 2 kxB2 ϭ 2 60(0.6 ϩ 1.2)2 ϭ 97.2 J

Substitution into the alternative work-energy equation 3/21a gives
[TA ϩ VA ϩ UЈ ϭ TC ϩ VC]
A-C

0 ϩ 0 ϩ 10.8 ϩ 150 ϭ 1 (10)vC2 ϩ 58.9 ϩ 97.2
2
vC ϭ 0.974 m/s

Ans.

m

ᕢ The reactions of the guides on the
slider are normal to the direction of
motion and do no work.

Article 3/7

Potential Energy

SAMPLE PROBLEM 3/18

A

mA

The system shown is released from rest with the lightweight slender bar OA in
the vertical position shown. The torsional spring at O is undeﬂected in the initial
position and exerts a restoring moment of magnitude k␪␪ on the bar, where ␪ is the
counterclockwise angular deﬂection of the bar. The string S is attached to point C
of the bar and slips without friction through a vertical hole in the support surface.
For the values mA ϭ 2 kg, mB ϭ 4 kg, L ϭ 0.5 m, and k␪ ϭ 13 N ⅐ m/rad:

181

L
––
2

θ

C

S

L
––
2

kθ

(a) Determine the speed vA of particle A when ␪ reaches 90Њ.
O

(b) Plot vA as a function of ␪ over the range 0 Յ ␪ Յ 90Њ. Identify the maximum
value of vA and the value of ␪ at which this maximum occurs.

Solution (a). We begin by establishing a general relationship for the potential
energy associated with the deﬂection of a torsional spring. Recalling that the
change in potential energy is the work done on the spring to deform it, we write

͵

␪

B

mB

1
k ␪2
2 ␪
We also need to establish the relationship between vA and vB when ␪ ϭ 90Њ. Noting that the speed of point C is always vA/2, and further noting that the speed of
cylinder B is one-half the speed of point C at ␪ ϭ 90Њ, we conclude that at ␪ ϭ 90Њ,
Ve ϭ

0

k␪␪ d␪ ϭ

C
C′

1
v
4 A
Establishing datums at the initial altitudes of bodies A and B, and with state 1 at
␪ ϭ 0 and state 2 at ␪ ϭ 90Њ, we write
vB ϭ

θ

90° – θ
—–—–
2

[T1 ϩ V1 ϩ UЈ ϭ T2 ϩ V2]
1-2

ᕡ

0ϩ0ϩ0ϭ

΂ ΃

΂΃

LΊ2
␲
1
1
1
m v 2 ϩ mBvB2 Ϫ mA gL Ϫ mB g
ϩ k␪
2 A A
2
2
2
4

0ϭ

΂ ΃

vA
1
1
(2)vA2 ϩ (4)
2
2
4

2

Ϫ 2(9.81)(0.5) Ϫ 4(9.81)

C″
(top of hole)

΂0.5Ί2΃ ϩ 1 (13)΂␲΃
2
2
4

O

L
––
2

2

vA ϭ 0.794 m/s

Solving,

90° – θ
—–—–
2

2

With numbers:

L
––
2

L
––
2

1.5

Ans.

(b). We leave our deﬁnition of the initial state 1 as is, but now redeﬁne state 2

ϭ

ͯ
ͯ ͯ ΄ ΂ ΃΅ ͯ
ͯ ΂ ˙΃ ΂ Њ ΃ ͯ ˙ ΂ Њ ΃

90 Ϫ ␪
␪
1
L Ϫ cos
2
2
2

˙
Finally, because vA ϭ L ␪ ,

vB ϭ

ϭ

90 Ϫ ␪
L␪
cos
4
2

vA
90Њ Ϫ ␪
cos
4
2

΂

[T1 ϩ V1 ϩ UЈ ϭ T2 ϩ V2]
1-2

΄

Ϫ mB g

΂

0.5

0
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

θ, deg

΃

vA
90Њ Ϫ ␪
1
1
0 ϩ 0 ϩ 0 ϭ mAvA2 ϩ mB
cos
2
2
4
2

(vA)max = 1.400 m/s
at θ = 56.4°

1
vA, m/s

to be associated with an arbitrary value of ␪. From the accompanying diagram
constructed for an arbitrary value of ␪, we see that the speed of cylinder B can be
written as
90Њ Ϫ ␪
1 d Ј Љ
1 d
L
ᕢ
vB ϭ
(C C ) ϭ
2 sin
2 dt
2 dt
2
2

Helpful Hints

ᕡ Note that mass B will move down-

΃΅ Ϫm gL(1 Ϫ cos ␪)
2

A

΂1΃΄LΊ2 Ϫ 2 L sin ΂90Њ2Ϫ ␪΃΅ ϩ 1 k ␪
2
2
2
2
␪

2

Upon substitution of the given quantities, we vary ␪ to produce the plot of vA
versus ␪. The maximum value of vA is seen to be
(vA)max ϭ 1.400 m/s at ␪ ϭ 56.4Њ

Ans.

ward by one-half of the length of
string initially above the supporting
surface. This downward distance is
LΊ2
1 L
.
Ί2 ϭ
2 2
4
ᕢ The absolute-value signs reﬂect the
fact that vB is known to be positive.

΂ ΃

90

182

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

PROBLEMS
Introductory Problems
3/139 The 2-lb collar is released from rest at A and slides
freely up the inclined rod, striking the stop at B
with a velocity v. The spring of stiffness k ϭ 1.60
lb/ft has an unstretched length of 15 in. Calculate v.

3/141 The 1.2-kg slider is released from rest in position A
and slides without friction along the vertical-plane
guide shown. Determine (a) the speed vB of the
slider as it passes position B and (b) the maximum
deﬂection ␦ of the spring.

1.2 kg

A

O

1.6
0l
b/f
t

3m
20″

k=

E
30°
C

1.5 m

D
30°

k = 24 kN/m

B

B
10″

A

Problem 3/141
18″
Problem 3/139

3/140 The 4-kg slider is released from rest at A and slides
with negligible friction down the circular rod in
the vertical plane. Determine (a) the velocity v of
the slider as it reaches the bottom at B and (b) the
maximum deformation x of the spring.

3/142 The 1.2-kg slider of the system of Prob. 3/141 is
released from rest in position A and slides without
friction along the vertical-plane guide. Determine
the normal force exerted by the guide on the slider
(a) just before it passes point C, (b) just after it
passes point C, and (c) just before it passes point E.
3/143 Point P on the 2-kg cylinder has an initial velocity
v0 ϭ 0.8 m/s as it passes position A. Neglect the
mass of the pulleys and cable and determine the
distance y of point P below A when the 3-kg cylinder has acquired an upward velocity of 0.6 m/s.

A

0.6 m

4 kg

P
A
B
k = 20 kN/m
Problem 3/140

v0

3 kg

2 kg
Problem 3/143

Article 3/7
3/144 The spring of constant k is unstretched when the
slider of mass m passes position B. If the slider is
released from rest in position A, determine its
speeds as it passes points B and C. What is the normal force exerted by the guide on the slider at position C? Neglect friction between the mass and the
circular guide, which lies in a vertical plane.

Problems

183

3/146 The system is released from rest with the spring
initially stretched 3 in. Calculate the velocity v of
the cylinder after it has dropped 0.5 in. The spring
has a stiffness of 6 lb/in. Neglect the mass of the
small pulley.

k = 6 lb/in.
A

k

R
m
100 lb

B
R

Problem 3/146
C
Problem 3/144

3/145 It is desired that the 100-lb container, when released
from rest in the position shown, have no velocity
after dropping 7 ft to the platform below. Specify
the proper weight W of the counterbalancing
cylinder.

3/147 The projectile of Prob. 3/122 is repeated here. By
the method of this article, determine the vertical
launch velocity v0 which will result in a maximum
altitude of R/2. The launch is from the north pole
and aerodynamic drag can be neglected. Use
g ϭ 9.825 m/s2 as the surface-level acceleration
due to gravity.
v0

24′

5′
R

100 lb

Problem 3/147
W

7′

Problem 3/145

184

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

3/148 The 1.5-kg slider C moves along the ﬁxed rod
under the action of the spring whose unstretched
length is 0.3 m. If the velocity of the slider is 2 m/s
at point A and 3 m/s at point B, calculate the work
Uƒ done by friction between these two points. Also,
determine the average friction force acting on the
slider between A and B if the length of the path is
0.70 m. The x-y plane is horizontal.

z

Representative Problems
3/150 The 0.8-kg particle is attached to the system of two
light rigid bars, all of which move in a vertical
plane. The spring is compressed an amount b/2
when ␪ ϭ 0, and the length b ϭ 0.30 m. The system
is released from rest in a position slightly above
that for ␪ ϭ 0. (a) If the maximum value of ␪ is observed to be 50Њ, determine the spring constant k.
(b) For k ϭ 400 N/m, determine the speed v of the
particle when ␪ ϭ 25Њ. Also ﬁnd the corresponding
˙
value of ␪.

B
B
b

v
A

0.4 m
k = 800 N/m

b

b

C

y

m

O

k

C

θ

x
A
0.3 m

Problem 3/150

0.4 m
Problem 3/148

3/149 The light rod is pivoted at O and carries the 5- and
10-lb particles. If the rod is released from rest at
␪ ϭ 60Њ and swings in the vertical plane, calculate
(a) the velocity v of the 5-lb particle just before it
hits the spring in the dashed position and (b) the
maximum compression x of the spring. Assume
that x is small so that the position of the rod when
the spring is compressed is essentially horizontal.

3/151 The two springs, each of stiffness k ϭ 1.2 kN/m,
are of equal length and undeformed when ␪ ϭ 0. If
the mechanism is released from rest in the position
˙
␪ ϭ 20Њ, determine its angular velocity ␪ when
␪ ϭ 0. The mass m of each sphere is 3 kg. Treat the
spheres as particles and neglect the masses of the
light rods and springs.

10 lb

O

12″
θ

k

k

θ

k = 200 lb/in.

O

m

0.25 m

18″
m
5 lb
Problem 3/149

Problem 3/151

m

Article 3/7
3/152 If the system is released from rest, determine the
speeds of both masses after B has moved 1 m. Neglect friction and the masses of the pulleys.

Problems

185

3/154 The 0.75-kg particle is attached to the light slender
rod OA which pivots freely about a horizontal axis
through point O. The system is released from rest
while in the position ␪ ϭ 0 where the spring is unstretched. If the particle is observed to stop momentarily in the position ␪ ϭ 50Њ, determine the
spring constant k. For your computed value of k,
what is the particle speed v at the position ␪ ϭ 25Њ?

40 kg
A

B
20°
8 kg
0.6 m

B

k

Problem 3/152

3/153 The 3-lb ball is given an initial velocity vA ϭ 8 ft/sec
in the vertical plane at position A, where the two
horizontal attached springs are unstretched. The
ball follows the dashed path shown and crosses
point B, which is 5 in. directly below A. Calculate
the velocity vB of the ball at B. Each spring has a
stiffness of 10 lb/in.

O

θ

0.6
m

0.75 kg
A

Problem 3/154

3/155 The spring has an unstretched length of 25 in. If
the system is released from rest in the position
shown, determine the speed v of the ball (a) when
it has dropped a vertical distance of 10 in. and
(b) when the rod has rotated 35Њ.

vA

A
12″

12″
vB

5″

1.2 lb/in.

B

Problem 3/153

9 lb

26″

10″
O
24″
Problem 3/155

186

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

3/156 The two 1.5-kg spheres are released from rest and
gently nudged outward from the position ␪ ϭ 0
and then rotate in a vertical plane about the ﬁxed
centers of their attached gears, thus maintaining
the same angle ␪ for both rods. Determine the velocity v of each sphere as the rods pass the position
␪ ϭ 30Њ. The spring is unstretched when ␪ ϭ 0, and
the masses of the two identical rods and the two
gear wheels may be neglected.

3/158 The collar has a mass of 2 kg and is attached to the
light spring, which has a stiffness of 30 N/m and an
unstretched length of 1.5 m. The collar is released
from rest at A and slides up the smooth rod under
the action of the constant 50-N force. Calculate the
velocity v of the collar as it passes position B.

B

1.5 kg

1.5 kg

1.5 m

mm
240

k = 60 N/m

30°
50 N

θ

θ

k = 30 N/m

A

mm
240

2m
Problem 3/158

80
mm
Problem 3/156

3/157 A rocket launches an unpowered space capsule at
point A with an absolute velocity vA ϭ 8000 mi/hr
at an altitude of 25 mi. After the capsule has traveled a distance of 250 mi measured along its absolute space trajectory, its velocity at B is 7600
mi/hr and its altitude is 50 mi. Determine the average resistance P to motion in the rariﬁed atmosphere. The earth weight of the capsule is 48 lb, and
the mean radius of the earth is 3959 mi. Consider
the center of the earth ﬁxed in space.
vB

3/159 The shank of the 5-lb vertical plunger occupies the
dashed position when resting in equilibrium
against the spring of stiffness k ϭ 10 lb/in. The
upper end of the spring is welded to the plunger,
and the lower end is welded to the base plate. If
the plunger is lifted 11 in. above its equilibrium po2
sition and released from rest, calculate its velocity
v as it strikes the button A. Friction is negligible.
W = 5 lb

B

k = 10 lb/in.
vA
A

50 mi

25 mi

1
–″
4

–
11″
2

A
Problem 3/157
Problem 3/159

Article 3/7
3/160 Upon its return voyage from a space mission, the
spacecraft has a velocity of 24 000 km/h at point A,
which is 7000 km from the center of the earth. Determine the velocity of the spacecraft when it
reaches point B, which is 6500 km from the center of
the earth. The trajectory between these two points is
outside the effect of the earth’s atmosphere.
A

B

Problems

3/162 A 175-lb pole vaulter carrying a uniform 16-ft, 10-lb
pole approaches the jump with a velocity v and
manages to barely clear the bar set at a height of
18 ft. As he clears the bar, his velocity and that of
the pole are essentially zero. Calculate the minimum possible value of ␷ required for him to make
the jump. Both the horizontal pole and the center
of gravity of the vaulter are 42 in. above the
ground during the approach.

18′

O

187

v
16′
42″

Problem 3/160

3/161 The 5-kg cylinder is released from rest in the position shown and compresses the spring of stiffness
k ϭ 1.8 kN/m. Determine the maximum compression xmax of the spring and the maximum velocity
vmax of the cylinder along with the corresponding
deﬂection x of the spring.

Problem 3/162

3/163 The cylinder of mass m is attached to the collar
bracket at A by a spring of stiffness k. The collar
ﬁts loosely on the vertical shaft, which is lowering
both the collar and the suspended cylinder with a
constant velocity v. When the collar strikes the
base B, it stops abruptly with essentially no rebound. Determine the maximum additional deﬂection ␦ of the spring after the impact.

5 kg

A

100 mm
x
B

k = 1.8 kN/m

k

Problem 3/161

v
m

Problem 3/163

v

188

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

3/164 The cars of an amusement-park ride have a speed
v1 ϭ 90 km/h at the lowest part of the track. Determine their speed v2 at the highest part of the track.
Neglect energy loss due to friction. (Caution: Give
careful thought to the change in potential energy
of the system of cars.)

3/166 Calculate the maximum velocity of slider B if the
system is released from rest with x ϭ y. Motion is
in the vertical plane. Assume that friction is negligible. The sliders have equal masses, and the motion is restricted to y Ն 0.
A

v2

0.9 m

m
15
90°

y

B

90°
5m
v1 1

x
Problem 3/166
Problem 3/164

3/165 The two right-angle rods with attached spheres are
released from rest in the position ␪ ϭ 0. If the system is observed to momentarily come to rest when
␪ ϭ 45Њ, determine the spring constant k. The
spring is unstretched when ␪ ϭ 0. Treat the
spheres as particles and neglect friction.

Vertical

k

2 kg

3 kg
4 kg

θ

0m
m

Problem 3/165

k

20

60
mm

m
Problem 3/167

m

θ

θ

0m

0m

20

180 m
m

3 kg

30

2 kg

3/167 The mechanism is released from rest with ␪ ϭ 180Њ,
where the uncompressed spring of stiffness
k ϭ 900 N/m is just touching the underside of the
4-kg collar. Determine the angle ␪ corresponding
to the maximum compression of the spring. Motion is in the vertical plane, and the mass of the
links may be neglected.

Article 3/7
3/168 A particle of mass m is attached to one end of a
light slender rod which pivots about a horizontal
axis through point O. The spring constant
k ϭ 200 N/m and the distance b ϭ 200 mm. If the
system is released from rest in the horizontal
position shown where the spring is unstretched,
the bar is observed to deﬂect a maximum of 30Њ
clockwise. Determine (a) the particle mass m and
(b) the particle speed v after a displacement of 15Њ
from the position shown. Neglect friction.

B
C

m
A

C
O

A

1.25b

b
––
2

B

θ

k

b

m
b

b

O

Problem 3/168

3/169 The 3-kg sphere is carried by the parallelogram
linkage where the spring is unstretched when
␪ ϭ 90Њ. If the mechanism is released from rest at
␪ ϭ 90Њ, calculate the velocity v of the sphere when
the position ␪ ϭ 135Њ is passed. The links are in
the vertical plane, and their mass is small and may
be neglected.

m
500 mm
Problem 3/169

0m

/m
0N
10
k=
θ

50

50

0m

m

3 kg

189

3/170 The system is at rest with the spring unstretched
when ␪ ϭ 0. The 3-kg particle is then given a slight
nudge to the right. (a) If the system comes to momentary rest at ␪ ϭ 40Њ, determine the spring constant k. (b) For the value k ϭ 100 N/m, ﬁnd the
speed of the particle when ␪ ϭ 25Њ. Use the value
b ϭ 0.40 m throughout and neglect friction.

k

θ

Problems

Problem 3/170

190

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

3/171 The system is released from rest with the angle
˙
␪ ϭ 90Њ. Determine ␪ when ␪ reaches 60Њ. Use the
values m1 ϭ 1 kg, m2 ϭ 1.25 kg, and b ϭ 0.40 m.
Neglect friction and the mass of bar OB, and treat
the body B as a particle.

3/172 The ﬂexible bicycle-type chain of length ␲r/2 and
mass per unit length ␳ is released from rest with
␪ ϭ 0 in the smooth circular channel and falls
through the hole in the supporting surface. Determine the velocity v of the chain as the last link
leaves the slot.

2b
O
θ

C

b

r

θ

A

2b

m2
m1
B
Problem 3/171

Problem 3/172

Article 3/9

Linear Impulse and Linear Momentum

191

SECTION C IMPULSE AND MOMENTUM
3/8

Introduction

In the previous two articles, we focused attention on the equations of
work and energy, which are obtained by integrating the equation of motion F ϭ ma with respect to the displacement of the particle. We found
that the velocity changes could be expressed directly in terms of the work
done or in terms of the overall changes in energy. In the next two articles, we will integrate the equation of motion with respect to time rather
than displacement. This approach leads to the equations of impulse and
momentum. These equations greatly facilitate the solution of many problems in which the applied forces act during extremely short periods of
time (as in impact problems) or over speciﬁed intervals of time.

3/9

Linear Impulse and Linear Momentum

Consider again the general curvilinear motion in space of a particle
of mass m, Fig. 3/11, where the particle is located by its position vector r
r
measured from a ﬁxed origin O. The velocity of the particle is v ϭ ˙ and
is tangent to its path (shown as a dashed line). The resultant ΣF of all
v
forces on m is in the direction of its acceleration ˙. We may now write
the basic equation of motion for the particle, Eq. 3/3, as
ΣF ϭ mv ϭ
˙

d
(mv)
dt

or

˙
ΣF ϭ G

˙
ΣFy ϭ Gy

G = mv
v2 t 2

·
v=r
·
G

r2

(3/26)

These equations may be applied independently of one another.

The Linear Impulse-Momentum Principle
All that we have done so far in this article is to rewrite Newton’s
second law in an alternative form in terms of momentum. But we are
now able to describe the effect of the resultant force ΣF on the linear

ΣF
y

m

r
v1
O

˙
ΣFz ϭ Gz

·
v

(3/25)

where the product of the mass and velocity is deﬁned as the linear momentum G ϭ mv of the particle. Equation 3/25 states that the resultant
of all forces acting on a particle equals its time rate of change of linear
momentum. In SI the units of linear momentum mv are seen to be
kg ⅐ m/s, which also equals N ⅐ s. In U.S. customary units, the units of
linear momentum mv are [lb/(ft/sec2)][ft/sec] ϭ lb-sec.
Because Eq. 3/25 is a vector equation, we recognize that, in addition to
˙
the equality of the magnitudes of ΣF and G, the direction of the resultant
force coincides with the direction of the rate of change in linear momentum, which is the direction of the rate of change in velocity. Equation 3/25
is one of the most useful and important relationships in dynamics, and it
is valid as long as the mass m of the particle is not changing with time.
The case where m changes with time is discussed in Art. 4/7 of Chapter 4.
We now write the three scalar components of Eq. 3/25 as

˙
ΣFx ϭ Gx

z

t1
Path

r1

x

Figure 3/11

192

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

momentum of the particle over a ﬁnite period of time simply by integrating Eq. 3/25 with respect to the time t. Multiplying the equation by
dt gives ΣF dt ϭ dG, which we integrate from time t1 to time t2 to obtain

͵

t2

t1

ΣF dt ϭ G2 Ϫ G1 ϭ ⌬G

(3/27)

Here the linear momentum at time t2 is G2 ϭ mv2 and the linear momentum at time t1 is G1 ϭ mv1. The product of force and time is deﬁned as
the linear impulse of the force, and Eq. 3/27 states that the total linear
impulse on m equals the corresponding change in linear momentum of m.
Alternatively, we may write Eq. 3/27 as
G1 ϩ

͵

t2

t1

ΣF dt ϭ G2

(3/27a)

which says that the initial linear momentum of the body plus the linear
impulse applied to it equals its ﬁnal linear momentum.
The impulse integral is a vector which, in general, may involve
changes in both magnitude and direction during the time interval.
Under these conditions, it will be necessary to express ΣF and G in component form and then combine the integrated components. The components of Eq. 3/27a are the scalar equations

͵
m(v ) ϩ ͵
m(v ) ϩ ͵
m(v1)x ϩ

1 y

1 z

t2

t1
t2

t1
t2

t1

ΣFx dt ϭ m(v2)x
ΣFy dt ϭ m(v2)y

(3/27b)

ΣFz dt ϭ m(v2)z

These three scalar impulse-momentum equations are completely
independent.
Whereas Eq. 3/27 clearly stresses that the external linear impulse
causes a change in the linear momentum, the order of the terms in Eqs.
3/27a and 3/27b corresponds to the natural sequence of events. While
the form of Eq. 3/27 may be best for the experienced dynamicist, the
form of Eqs. 3/27a and 3/27b is very effective for the beginner.
We now introduce the concept of the impulse-momentum diagram.
Once the body to be analyzed has been clearly identiﬁed and isolated, we
construct three drawings of the body as shown in Fig. 3/12. In the ﬁrst
drawing, we show the initial momentum mv1, or components thereof. In

t2
t1

G2 = mv2
ΣF dt

G1 = mv1

+

=
Figure 3/12

the second or middle drawing, we show all the external linear impulses
(or components thereof). In the ﬁnal drawing, we show the ﬁnal linear
momentum mv2 (or its components). The writing of the impulse-momentum equations 3/27b then follows directly from these drawings, with a
clear one-to-one correspondence between diagrams and equation terms.
We note that the center diagram is very much like a free-body diagram, except that the impulses of the forces appear rather than the
forces themselves. As with the free-body diagram, it is necessary to include the effects of all forces acting on the body, except those forces
whose magnitudes are negligible.
In some cases, certain forces are very large and of short duration. Such
forces are called impulsive forces. An example is a force of sharp impact.
We frequently assume that impulsive forces are constant over their time of
duration, so that they can be brought outside the linear-impulse integral.
In addition, we frequently assume that nonimpulsive forces can be neglected in comparison with impulsive forces. An example of a nonimpulsive
force is the weight of a baseball during its collision with a bat—the weight
of the ball (about 5 oz) is small compared with the force (which could be
several hundred pounds in magnitude) exerted on the ball by the bat.
There are cases where a force acting on a particle varies with the
time in a manner determined by experimental measurements or by
other approximate means. In this case a graphical or numerical integration must be performed. If, for example, a force F acting on a particle in
a given direction varies with the time t as indicated in Fig. 3/13, then
the impulse,
the curve.

͵

The impact force exerted by the racquet on this tennis ball will usually
be much larger than the weight of
the tennis ball.

Force, F

t2

t1

F dt, of this force from t1 to t2 is the shaded area under

F2
F1

Conservation of Linear Momentum
If the resultant force on a particle is zero during an interval of time,
we see that Eq. 3/25 requires that its linear momentum G remain constant. In this case, the linear momentum of the particle is said to be conserved. Linear momentum may be conserved in one coordinate direction,
such as x, but not necessarily in the y- or z-direction. A careful examination of the impulse-momentum diagram of the particle will disclose
whether the total linear impulse on the particle in a particular direction
is zero. If it is, the corresponding linear momentum is unchanged (conserved) in that direction.
Consider now the motion of two particles a and b which interact
during an interval of time. If the interactive forces F and ϪF between
them are the only unbalanced forces acting on the particles during the
interval, it follows that the linear impulse on particle a is the negative of
the linear impulse on particle b. Therefore, from Eq. 3/27, the change
in linear momentum ⌬Ga of particle a is the negative of the change
⌬Gb in linear momentum of particle b. So we have ⌬Ga ϭ Ϫ⌬Gb or
⌬(Ga ϩ Gb) ϭ 0. Thus, the total linear momentum G ϭ Ga ϩ Gb for the
system of the two particles remains constant during the interval, and we
write
⌬G ϭ 0

or

G1 ϭ G2

(3/28)

Equation 3/28 expresses the principle of conservation of linear momentum.

193

t1

t2
Time, t

Figure 3/13

Images, Inc.

Linear Impulse and Linear Momentum

GJON MILI/GettyImages/Time & LifeCreative/Getty

Article 3/9

194

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

SAMPLE PROBLEM 3/19
A tennis player strikes the tennis ball with her racket when the ball is at the
uppermost point of its trajectory as shown. The horizontal velocity of the ball
just before impact with the racket is v1 ϭ 50 ft/sec, and just after impact its velocity is v2 ϭ 70 ft/sec directed at the 15Њ angle as shown. If the 2-oz ball is in
contact with the racket for 0.02 sec, determine the magnitude of the average
force R exerted by the racket on the ball. Also determine the angle ␤ made by R
with the horizontal.

v2
15°
v1

Solution. We construct the impulse-momentum diagrams for the ball as follows:

t2

y

mg dt
t1

mv1

+

ᕡ

=

mv2
15° x

Helpful Hints

ᕡ Recall that for the impulse-momentum

t2
t1

Rx dt
t1

ᕢ [m(vx )1 ϩ

[m(vy )1 ϩ

͵ ΣF dt ϭ m(v ) ]
t2

t1

x

x 2

Ϫ

diagrams, initial linear momentum
goes in the ﬁrst diagram, all external linear impulses go in the second
diagram, and ﬁnal linear momentum goes in the third diagram.

t2

Ry dt

2/16
2/16
(50) ϩ Rx(0.02) ϭ
(70 cos 15Њ )
32.2
32.2

͵ ΣF dt ϭ m(v ) ]
y

y 2

t2

t1

Rx dt, the

integral sign, resulting in Rx

2/16
2/16
(0) ϩ Ry(0.02) Ϫ (2/16)(0.02) ϭ
(70 sin 15Њ)
32.2
32.2
We can now solve for the impact forces as
Rx ϭ 22.8 lb
Ry ϭ 3.64 lb
We note that the impact force Ry ϭ 3.64 lb is considerably larger than the
0.125-lb weight of the ball. Thus, the weight mg, a nonimpulsive force, could
have been neglected as small in comparison with Ry. Had we neglected the
weight, the computed value of Ry would have been 3.52 lb.
We now determine the magnitude and direction of R as
R ϭ ΊR2 ϩ R2 ϭ Ί22.82 ϩ 3.642 ϭ 23.1 lb
x
y
␤ ϭ tanϪ1

͵

average impact force Rx is a constant,
so that it can be brought outside the

t2

t1

ᕢ For the linear impulse

Ry
Rx

ϭ tanϪ1

3.64
ϭ 9.06Њ
22.8

Ans.
Ans.

͵

t2

t1

dt ϭ

Rx(t2 Ϫ t1) ϭ Rx⌬t. The linear impulse
in the y-direction has been similarly
treated.

Article 3/9

Linear Impulse and Linear Momentum

SAMPLE PROBLEM 3/20

195

z

A 2-lb particle moves in the vertical y-z plane (z up, y horizontal) under the
action of its weight and a force F which varies with time. The linear momentum
3
of the particle in pound-seconds is given by the expression G ϭ 2 (t2 ϩ 3)j Ϫ

F

2 3
3 (t Ϫ 4)k, where t is the time in seconds. Determine F and its magnitude for the

Up

instant when t ϭ 2 sec.

– 2k lb

Solution. The weight expressed as a vector is Ϫ2k lb. Thus, the force-momen-

y

tum equation becomes
d 3 2
[ (t ϩ 3)j Ϫ 2 (t3 Ϫ 4)k]
3
dt 2
2
ϭ 3tj Ϫ 2t k

˙
ᕡ [ΣF ϭ G]

F Ϫ 2k ϭ

Helpful Hint

For t ϭ 2 sec,

F ϭ 2k ϩ 3(2)j Ϫ 2(22)k ϭ 6j Ϫ 6k lb

Ans.

Thus,

F ϭ Ί62 ϩ 62 ϭ 6Ί2 lb

Ans.

ᕡ Don’t forget that ΣF includes all external forces acting on the particle,
including the weight.

SAMPLE PROBLEM 3/21
A particle with a mass of 0.5 kg has a velocity of 10 m/s in the x-direction at
time t ϭ 0. Forces F1 and F2 act on the particle, and their magnitudes change
with time according to the graphical schedule shown. Determine the velocity v2
of the particle at the end of the 3-s interval. The motion occurs in the horizontal
x-y plane.

Solution.

y
F, N
4
x

F1

2

F1 10 m/s
0

First, we construct the impulse-momentum diagrams as shown.

F2
0

1

2
t, s

F2
m(v1)y = 0
m(v2)y

t2
t1

+
m(v1)x =
0.5 (10) kg·m/s

8j m /s

F1 dt

=

v2 = 10 m /s

m(v2)x

t2
t1

θx = 126.9°

– 6i m/s

F2 dt

t=3s
8

Then the impulse-momentum equations follow as

ᕡ [m(v1)x ϩ

͵ ΣF dt ϭ m(v ) ]

6

t2

x

t1

0.5(10) Ϫ [4(1) ϩ 2(3 Ϫ 1)] ϭ 0.5(v2)x

2 x

y, m
4

(v2)x ϭ Ϫ6 m/s
[m(v1)y ϩ

͵ ΣF dt ϭ m(v ) ]
t2

t1

y

2

0.5(0) ϩ [1(2) ϩ 2(3 Ϫ 2)] ϭ 0.5(v2)y

2 y

t=2s

t=1s
0
0

(v2)y ϭ 8 m/s

2

4

6

x, m

Thus,
v2 ϭ Ϫ6i ϩ 8j m/s
␪x ϭ

and
tanϪ1

Helpful Hint

v2 ϭ Ί62 ϩ 82 ϭ 10 m/s
8
ϭ 126.9Њ
Ϫ6

ᕡ The impulse in each direction is the
Ans.

Although not called for, the path of the particle for the ﬁrst 3 seconds is plotted in the ﬁgure. The velocity at t ϭ 3 s is shown together with its components.

corresponding area under the forcetime graph. Note that F1 is in the
negative x-direction, so its impulse is
negative.

3

196

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

SAMPLE PROBLEM 3/22
P

The loaded 150-kg skip is rolling down the incline at 4 m/s when a force P is
applied to the cable as shown at time t ϭ 0. The force P is increased uniformly
with the time until it reaches 600 N at t ϭ 4 s, after which time it remains constant at this value. Calculate (a) the time tЈ at which the skip reverses its direction and (b) the velocity v of the skip at t ϭ 8 s. Treat the skip as a particle.
v1

Solution. The stated variation of P with the time is plotted, and the impulsemomentum diagrams of the skip are drawn.

P, N
600
Δt

=
N2 dt

30°

30°

2P dt

+
30°

s
m/

150v2

150(9.81) dt
x
150(4) kg·m/s

=4

0
0

30°

4

t′

t, s

8

N1 dt

Part (a). The skip reverses direction when its velocity becomes zero. We will
assume that this condition occurs at t ϭ 4 ϩ ⌬t s. The impulse-momentum equation applied consistently in the positive x-direction gives
m(v1 )x ϩ

ᕡ

͵ ΣF dt ϭ m(v )
x

Helpful Hint

2 x

1

150(Ϫ4) ϩ 2 (4)(2)(600) ϩ 2(600)⌬t Ϫ 150(9.81) sin 30Њ(4 ϩ ⌬t) ϭ 150(0)
⌬t ϭ 2.46 s

tЈ ϭ 4 ϩ 2.46 ϭ 6.46 s

Ans.

Part (b). Applying the momentum equation to the entire 8-s interval gives
m(v1 )x ϩ

͵ ΣF dt ϭ m(v )
x

2 x

150(Ϫ4) ϩ 1 (4)(2)(600) ϩ 4(2)(600) Ϫ 150(9.81) sin 30Њ(8) ϭ 150(v2)x
2
(v2)x ϭ 4.76 m/s

ᕡ The impulse-momentum diagram
keeps us from making the error of
using the impulse of P rather than
2P or of forgetting the impulse of the
component of the weight. The ﬁrst
term in the linear impulse is the triangular area of the P-t relation for the
ﬁrst 4 s, doubled for the force of 2P.

Ans.

The same result is obtained by analyzing the interval from tЈ to 8 s.
y

SAMPLE PROBLEM 3/23

12 m/s

The 50-g bullet traveling at 600 m/s strikes the 4-kg block centrally and is
embedded within it. If the block slides on a smooth horizontal plane with a velocity of 12 m/s in the direction shown prior to impact, determine the velocity v2 of
the block and embedded bullet immediately after impact.

4 kg

0.050 kg

30°

x

600 m/s

Solution.

Since the force of impact is internal to the system composed of the
block and bullet and since there are no other external forces acting on the system in the plane of motion, it follows that the linear momentum of the system is
conserved. Thus,

16.83 m/s

θ = 52.4°
x

ᕡ [G1 ϭ G2] 0.050(600j) ϩ 4(12)(cos 30Њi ϩ sin 30Њj) ϭ (4 ϩ 0.050)v2
v2 ϭ 10.26i ϩ 13.33j m/s

Ans.
Helpful Hint

The ﬁnal velocity and its direction are given by
[v ϭ Ίvx2 ϩ vy2]
[tan ␪ ϭ vy /vx]

v2 ϭ Ί(10.26)2 ϩ (13.33)2 ϭ 16.83 m/s
tan ␪ ϭ

13.33
ϭ 1.299
10.26

␪ ϭ 52.4Њ

ᕡ Working with the vector form of the
Ans.
Ans.

principle of conservation of linear
momentum is clearly equivalent to
working with the component form.

Article 3/9

PROBLEMS
Introductory Problems
3/173 The rubber mallet is used to drive a cylindrical
plug into the wood member. If the impact force
varies with time as shown in the plot, determine
the magnitude of the linear impulse delivered by
the mallet to the plug.

Problems

197

3/176 A 75-g projectile traveling at 600 m/s strikes and
becomes embedded in the 50-kg block, which is initially stationary. Compute the energy lost during
the impact. Express your answer as an absolute
value ͉⌬E ͉ and as a percentage n of the original
system energy E.
75 g 600 m/s

50 kg

Problem 3/176

3/177 A jet-propelled airplane with a mass of 10 Mg is
ﬂying horizontally at a constant speed of 1000 km/h
under the action of the engine thrust T and the
equal and opposite air resistance R. The pilot ignites two rocket-assist units, each of which develops a forward thrust T0 of 8 kN for 9 s. If the
velocity of the airplane in its horizontal ﬂight is
1050 km/h at the end of the 9 s, calculate the timeaverage increase ⌬R in air resistance. The mass of
the rocket fuel used is negligible compared with
that of the airplane.

F

F, N

200

0
0 0.002
t, s

0.010
0.009
Problem 3/173

R

3/174 The 1500-kg car has a velocity of 30 km/h up the
10-percent grade when the driver applies more
power for 8 s to bring the car up to a speed of
60 km/h. Calculate the time average F of the total
force tangent to the road exerted on the tires during the 8 s. Treat the car as a particle and neglect
air resistance.
v

1

T
2T0
Problem 3/177

3/178 A 60-g bullet is ﬁred horizontally with a velocity
v1 ϭ 600 m /s into the 3-kg block of soft wood
initially at rest on the horizontal surface. The
bullet emerges from the block with the velocity
v2 ϭ 400 m /s, and the block is observed to slide a
distance of 2.70 m before coming to rest. Determine the coefﬁcient of kinetic friction ␮k between
the block and the supporting surface.
400 m/s

3 kg

600 m/s

10

60 g
Problem 3/174

3/175 A 0.2-kg particle is moving with a velocity
v1 ϭ i ϩ j ϩ 2k m/s at time t1 ϭ 1 s. If the single
force F ϭ (5 ϩ 3t)i ϩ (2 Ϫ t2)j ϩ 3k N acts on the
particle, determine its velocity v2 at time t2 ϭ 4 s.

2.70 m
Problem 3/178

198

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

3/179 At time t ϭ 0, the velocity of cylinder A is 0.3 m/s
down. By the methods of this article, determine
the velocity of cylinder B at time t ϭ 2 s. Assume
no mechanical interference and neglect all friction.

3/182 The 90-kg man dives from the 40-kg canoe. The
velocity indicated in the ﬁgure is that of the man relative to the canoe just after loss of contact. If the
man, woman, and canoe are initially at rest, determine the horizontal component of the absolute
velocity of the canoe just after separation. Neglect
drag on the canoe, and assume that the 60-kg
woman remains motionless relative to the canoe.
3 m/s
30°
90 kg

60 kg
40 kg

4 kg

5 kg

Problem 3/182
B
A
Problem 3/179

3/180 The resistance to motion of a certain racing toboggan is 2 percent of the normal force on its runners.
Calculate the time t required for the toboggan to
reach a speed of 100 km/h down the slope if it
starts from rest.

3/183 An experimental rocket sled weighs 5200 lb and is
propelled by six rocket motors each with an impulse rating of 8600 lb-sec. The rockets are ﬁred at
1-sec intervals, and the duration of each rocket ﬁring is 2 sec. If the velocity of the sled 10 sec from
the start is 200 mi/hr, determine the time average
R of the total aerodynamic and mechanical resistance to motion. Neglect the loss of mass due to exhausted fuel compared with the mass of the sled.

Rocket
thrust

R

Problem 3/183
5

v

12

Problem 3/180

3/181 Freight car A with a gross weight of 150,000 lb is
moving along the horizontal track in a switching yard
at 2 mi/hr. Freight car B with a gross weight of
120,000 lb and moving at 3 mi/hr overtakes car A and
is coupled to it. Determine (a) the common velocity v
of the two cars as they move together after being coupled and (b) the loss of energy ͉⌬E ͉ due to the impact.
3 mi/hr

3/184 The 200-kg lunar lander is descending onto the
moon’s surface with a velocity of 6 m/s when its
retro-engine is ﬁred. If the engine produces a
thrust T for 4 s which varies with time as shown
and then cuts off, calculate the velocity of the lander when t ϭ 5 s, assuming that it has not yet
landed. Gravitational acceleration at the moon’s
surface is 1.62 m/s2.
6 m/s
T, N
800

2 mi/hr
T

B

0

0

A
Problem 3/181

Problem 3/184

2
t, s

4

Article 3/9
3/185 The slider of mass m1 is released from rest in the
position shown and then slides down the right side
of the contoured body of mass m2. For the conditions m1 ϭ 0.50 kg, m2 ϭ 3 kg, and r ϭ 0.25 m, determine the absolute velocities of both masses at
the instant of separation. Neglect friction.

Problems

199

Representative Problems
3/188 The initially stationary 12-kg block is subjected to
the time-varying force whose magnitude P is
shown in the plot. The 30Њ angle remains constant.
Determine the block speed at (a) t ϭ 1 s and
(b) t ϭ 4 s.

m1
P

m2

P, N

r
12 kg
30°
r

100

μs = 0.50
μk = 0.40

0
0

5
t, s

Problem 3/188
Problem 3/185

3/186 A supertanker with a total displacement (weight) of
140(103) long tons (one long ton equals 2240 lb) is
moving forward at a speed of 2 knots when the engines are reversed to produce a rearward propeller
thrust of 90,000 lb. How long would it take the
tanker to acquire a speed of 2 knots in the reverse
direction? Can you justify neglecting the impulse
of water resistance of the hull? (Recall 1 knot ϭ
1.151 mi/hr.)
3/187 The 20-lb block is moving to the right with a velocity of 2 ft/sec on a horizontal surface when a force
P is applied to it at time t ϭ 0. Calculate the velocity v of the block when t ϭ 0.4 sec. The coefﬁcient
of kinetic friction is ␮k ϭ 0.30.
P, lb

v0 = 2 ft/sec

16

P
20 lb

8

0
0

μk = 0.30

0.2

3/189 The tow truck with attached 1200-kg car accelerates uniformly from 30 km/h to 70 km/h over a 15-s
interval. The average rolling resistance for the car
over this speed interval is 500 N. Assume that the
60Њ angle shown represents the time average conﬁguration and determine the average tension in
the tow cable.
60°

Problem 3/189

3/190 The 140-g projectile is ﬁred with a velocity of 600
m/s and picks up three washers, each with a mass
of 100 g. Find the common velocity v of the projectile and washers. Determine also the loss ͉⌬E ͉ of
energy during the interaction.
600 m/s

0.4
t, sec
Problem 3/187

Problem 3/190

200

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

3/191 The spring of modulus k ϭ 200 N/m is compressed
a distance of 300 mm and suddenly released with
the system at rest. Determine the absolute velocities of both masses when the spring is unstretched.
Neglect friction.

3/194 The initially stationary 100-lb block is subjected to
the time-varying force whose magnitude P is
shown in the plot. Determine the speed v of the
block at times t ϭ 1, 3, 5, and 7 sec. Note that the
force P is zero after t ϭ 6 sec.

k = 200 N/m

80
7 kg

P, lb

3 kg

P

3/192 The 4-kg cart, at rest at time t ϭ 0, is acted on by a
horizontal force which varies with time t as shown.
Neglect friction and determine the velocity of the
cart at t ϭ 1 s and at t ϭ 3 s.

Force F, N

30

4 kg

20
0
0

100 lb

Problem 3/191

Linear
20
Parabolic

μs = 0.60, μk = 0.40

4
t, sec

Problem 3/194

3/195 The 900-kg motorized unit A is designed to raise
and lower the 600-kg bucket B of concrete. Determine the average force R which supports unit A
during the 6 seconds required to slow the descent
of the bucket from 3 m/s to 0.5 m/s. Analyze the
entire system as a unit without ﬁnding the tension
in the cable.

F
0

0

2
Time t, s

4
A

Problem 3/192

3/193 The space shuttle launches an 800-kg satellite by
ejecting it from the cargo bay as shown. The ejection mechanism is activated and is in contact with
the satellite for 4 s to give it a velocity of 0.3 m/s
in the z-direction relative to the shuttle. The mass
of the shuttle is 90 Mg. Determine the component
of velocity vƒ of the shuttle in the minus z-direction
resulting from the ejection. Also ﬁnd the time average Fav of the ejection force.
z

v
B

Problem 3/195
v

y
x
Problem 3/193

6

Article 3/9
3/196 The cart of mass m is subjected to the exponentially
decreasing force F, which represents a shock or blast
loading. If the cart is stationary at time t ϭ 0, determine its velocity v and displacement s as functions of
time. What is the value of v for large values of t?

Problems

201

3/199 The cart is moving down the incline with a velocity
v0 ϭ 20 m/s at t ϭ 0, at which time the force P
begins to act as shown. After 5 seconds the force
continues at the 50-N level. Determine the velocity
of the cart at time t ϭ 8 s and calculate the time t
at which the cart velocity is zero.

F0
P, N
Force F

Parabolic

F

50
v0 =

F0 e–bt

m
0

0
0

P

0

5

/s
20 m
6 kg

t, s

Time t
15°

Problem 3/196

3/197 Determine the time required by a diesel-electric
locomotive, which produces a constant drawbar
pull of 60,000 lb, to increase the speed of an 1800ton freight train from 20 mi/hr to 30 mi/hr up a
1-percent grade. Train resistance is 10 lb per ton.
3/198 The 450-kg ram of a pile driver falls 1.4 m from
rest and strikes the top of a 240-kg pile embedded
0.9 m in the ground. Upon impact the ram is seen
to move with the pile with no noticeable rebound.
Determine the velocity v of the pile and ram immediately after impact. Can you justify using the
principle of conservation of momentum even though
the weights act during the impact?

Problem 3/199

3/200 Car B is initially stationary and is struck by car A
moving with initial speed v1 ϭ 20 mi/hr. The cars
become entangled and move together with speed vЈ
after the collision. If the time duration of the collision is 0.1 sec, determine (a) the common ﬁnal
speed vЈ, (b) the average acceleration of each car
during the collision, and (c) the magnitude R of the
average force exerted by each car on the other car
during the impact. All brakes are released during
the collision.
4000 lb

2000 lb
20 mi/hr

A

B
Problem 3/200

1.4 m

3/201 The 12-Mg truck drives onto the 350-Mg barge
from the dock at 20 km/h and brakes to a stop on
the deck. The barge is free to move in the water,
which offers negligible resistance to motion at low
speeds. Calculate the speed of the barge after the
truck has come to rest on it.
20 km/h

0.9 m

350 Mg

12 Mg
v
Problem 3/201

Problem 3/198

202

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

3/202 An 8-Mg truck is resting on the deck of a barge
which displaces 240 Mg and is at rest in still water.
If the truck starts and drives toward the bow at a
speed relative to the barge vrel ϭ 6 km/h, calculate
the speed v of the barge. The resistance to the motion of the barge through the water is negligible at
low speeds.
vrel = 6 km/h

8 Mg

3/204 A 16.1-lb body is traveling in a horizontal straight
line with a velocity of 12 ft/sec when a horizontal
force P is applied to it at right angles to the initial
direction of motion. If P varies according to the accompanying graph, remains constant in direction,
and is the only force acting on the body in its plane
of motion, ﬁnd the magnitude of the velocity of the
body when t ϭ 2 sec and the angle ␪ which the
velocity makes with the direction of P.

240 Mg

P, lb
4

v
Problem 3/202

3/203 Car B weighing 3200 lb and traveling west at
30 mi/hr collides with car A weighing 3400 lb and
traveling north at 20 mi/hr as shown. If the two
cars become entangled and move together as a unit
after the crash, compute the magnitude v of their
common velocity immediately after the impact and
the angle ␪ made by the velocity vector with the
north direction.

N

30 mi/hr

W
B

2

0

0

1
t, sec

1.5

2

Problem 3/204

3/205 The force P, which is applied to the 10-kg block initially at rest, varies linearly with time as indicated.
If the coefﬁcients of static and kinetic friction
between the block and the horizontal surface are
0.60 and 0.40, respectively, determine the velocity
of the block when t ϭ 4 s.
P, N

20 mi/hr

A
100
P
10 kg
Problem 3/203

μ s = 0.60, μ k = 0.40
0
0
Problem 3/205

4

t, s

Article 3/9
3/206 The 10-kg block is at rest on the rough incline at
time t ϭ 0 and then it is subjected to the force of
constant direction and time-varying magnitude P
given in the plot. Determine the velocity of the
block at times t ϭ 1, 3, 5, and 7 s. Note that the
force P is zero after t ϭ 6 s.

Problems

203

3/209 The cylindrical plug A of mass mA is released from
rest at B and slides down the smooth circular
guide. The plug strikes the block C and becomes
embedded in it. Write the expression for the distance s which the block and plug slide before coming to rest. The coefﬁcient of kinetic friction
between the block and the horizontal surface is ␮k.

P
20°
100
P, N

µs = 0.50
µk = 0.40

10 kg

B

r
0
0

15°

4
t, s

6
s

A

C

Problem 3/206

3/207 The 1.62-oz golf ball is struck by the ﬁve-iron and
acquires the velocity shown in a time period of
0.001 sec. Determine the magnitude R of the average force exerted by the club on the ball. What acceleration magnitude a does this force cause, and
what is the distance d over which the launch velocity is achieved, assuming constant acceleration?

v = 150 ft/sec

mA
μk

mC
Problem 3/209

3/210 The baseball is traveling with a horizontal velocity
of 85 mi/hr just before impact with the bat. Just
after the impact, the velocity of the 51-oz ball is
8
130 mi/hr directed at 35Њ to the horizontal as
shown. Determine the x- and y-components of the
average force R exerted by the bat on the baseball
during the 0.005-sec impact. Comment on the treatment of the weight of the baseball (a) during the impact and (b) over the ﬁrst few seconds after impact.

25°
130 mi/hr
35°
85 mi/hr

Problem 3/207

3/208 The 580-ton tug is towing the 1200-ton coal barge
at a steady speed of 6 knots. For a short period of
time, the stern winch takes in the towing cable at
the rate of 2 ft/sec. Calculate the reduced speed v of
the tug during this interval. Assume the tow cable
to be horizontal. (Recall 1 knot ϭ 1.688 ft/sec)

Problem 3/208

Problem 3/210

204

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

3/211 A tennis player strikes the tennis ball with her racket
while the ball is still rising. The ball speed before impact with the racket is v1 ϭ 15 m/s and after impact
its speed is v2 ϭ 22 m/s, with directions as shown in
the ﬁgure. If the 60-g ball is in contact with the
racket for 0.05 s, determine the magnitude of the average force R exerted by the racket on the ball. Find
the angle β made by R with the horizontal. Comment
on the treatment of the ball weight during impact.

᭤3/213 The simple pendulum A of mass mA and length l is
suspended from the trolley B of mass mB. If the
system is released from rest at ␪ ϭ 0, determine
the velocity vB of the trolley when ␪ ϭ 90Њ. Friction
is negligible.

B
θ

v2
v1

l

20°
10°

A
Problem 3/213

Problem 3/211

᭤3/212 The 400-kg ram of a pile driver is designed to fall
1.5 m from rest and strike the top of a 300-kg pile
partially embedded in the ground. The deeper the
penetration, the greater is the tendency for the ram
to rebound as a result of the impact. Calculate the
velocity v of the pile immediately after impact for
the following three conditions: (a) initial resistance
to penetration is small at the outset, and the ram is
observed to move with the pile immediately after
impact; (b) resistance to penetration has increased,
and the ram is seen to have zero velocity immediately after impact; (c) resistance to penetration is
high, and the ram is seen to rebound to a height of
100 mm above the point of impact. Why is it permissible to neglect the impulse of the weight of the
ram during impact?

1.5 m

Problem 3/212

᭤3/214 Two barges, each with a displacement (mass) of
500 Mg, are loosely moored in calm water. A stunt
driver starts his 1500-kg car from rest at A, drives
along the deck, and leaves the end of the 15Њ ramp
at a speed of 50 km/h relative to the barge and
ramp. The driver successfully jumps the gap and
brings his car to rest relative to barge 2 at B. Calculate the velocity v2 imparted to barge 2 just after
the car has come to rest on the barge. Neglect the
resistance of the water to motion at the low velocities involved.
A

1

15°

Problem 3/214

2

B

Article 3/10

3/10

Angular Impulse and Angular Momentum

Angular Impulse and Angular Momentum

mv

z

In addition to the equations of linear impulse and linear momentum,
there exists a parallel set of equations for angular impulse and angular
momentum. First, we deﬁne the term angular momentum. Figure 3/14a H O = r mv
shows a particle P of mass m moving along a curve in space. The particle
is located by its position vector r with respect to a convenient origin O of
r
ﬁxed coordinates x-y-z. The velocity of the particle is v ϭ ˙, and its linear
O
momentum is G ϭ mv. The moment of the linear momentum vector mv
about the origin O is deﬁned as the angular momentum HO of P about O
and is given by the cross-product relation for the moment of a vector

θ

A
P

x

(3/29)

The angular momentum then is a vector perpendicular to the plane A
deﬁned by r and v. The sense of HO is clearly deﬁned by the right-hand
rule for cross products.
The scalar components of angular momentum may be obtained
from the expansion

mv
HO = mvr sin θ

θ

r

θ P

r si

nθ

HO ϭ r ؋ mv ϭ m(vz y Ϫ vy z)i ϩ m(vx z Ϫ vz x)j ϩ m(vy x Ϫ vx y)k

ͯ

j
k
y z
vy vz

ͯ

View in plane A

(3/30)

(b)

Figure 3/14

so that
Hx ϭ m(vz y Ϫ vy z)

y

r

(a)

HO ϭ r ؋ mv

i
HO ϭ m x
vx

205

Hy ϭ m(vx z Ϫ vz x)

Hz ϭ m(vy x Ϫ vx y)

Each of these expressions for angular momentum may be checked easily
from Fig. 3/15, which shows the three linear-momentum components,
by taking the moments of these components about the respective axes.
To help visualize angular momentum, we show in Fig. 3/14b a twodimensional representation in plane A of the vectors shown in part a of
the ﬁgure. The motion is viewed in plane A deﬁned by r and v. The magnitude of the moment of mv about O is simply the linear momentum mv
times the moment arm r sin ␪ or mvr sin ␪, which is the magnitude of
the cross product HO ϭ r ؋ mv.
Angular momentum is the moment of linear momentum and must not
be confused with linear momentum. In SI units, angular momentum has
the units kg ⅐ (m/s) ⅐ m ϭ kg ⅐ m2/s ϭ N ⅐ m ⅐ s. In the U.S. customary system,
angular momentum has the units [lb/(ft/sec2)][ft/sec][ft] ϭ lb-ft-sec.

Rate of Change of Angular Momentum
We are now ready to relate the moment of the forces acting on the
particle P to its angular momentum. If ΣF represents the resultant of
all forces acting on the particle P of Fig. 3/14, the moment MO about the
origin O is the vector cross product
ΣMO ϭ r ؋ ΣF ϭ r ؋ mv
˙

mvz
z

mvy
m
z

r

y

mvx

x
O

y
x

Figure 3/15

206

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

where Newton’s second law ΣF ϭ m˙ has been substituted. We now difv
ferentiate Eq. 3/29 with time, using the rule for the differentiation of a
cross product (see item 9, Art. C/7, Appendix C) and obtain

˙
HO ϭ ˙ ؋ mv ϩ r ؋ mv ϭ v ؋ mv ϩ r ؋ mv
r
˙
˙
The term v ؋ mv is zero since the cross product of parallel vectors is
identically zero. Substitution into the expression for ΣMO gives

˙
ΣMO ϭ HO

(3/31)

Equation 3/31 states that the moment about the ﬁxed point O of all
forces acting on m equals the time rate of change of angular momentum
of m about O. This relation, particularly when extended to a system of
particles, rigid or nonrigid, provides one of the most powerful tools of
analysis in dynamics.
Equation 3/31 is a vector equation with scalar components

˙
ΣMOx ϭ HOx

˙
ΣMOy ϭ HOy

˙
ΣMOz ϭ HOz

(3/32)

The Angular Impulse-Momentum Principle
Equation 3/31 gives the instantaneous relation between the moment and the time rate of change of angular momentum. To obtain the
effect of the moment ΣMO on the angular momentum of the particle
over a ﬁnite period of time, we integrate Eq. 3/31 from time t1 to time t2.
Multiplying the equation by dt gives ΣMO dt ϭ dHO, which we integrate
to obtain

͵

t2

t1

ΣMO dt ϭ (HO)2 Ϫ (HO)1 ϭ ⌬HO

(3/33)

where (HO)2 ϭ r2 ؋ mv2 and (HO)1 ϭ r1 ؋ mv1. The product of moment
and time is deﬁned as angular impulse, and Eq. 3/33 states that the
total angular impulse on m about the ﬁxed point O equals the corresponding change in angular momentum of m about O.
Alternatively, we may write Eq. 3/33 as
(HO)1 ϩ

͵

t2

t1

ΣMO dt ϭ (HO)2

(3/33a)

which states that the initial angular momentum of the particle plus
the angular impulse applied to it equals its final angular momentum.
The units of angular impulse are clearly those of angular momentum,
which are N ⅐ m ⅐ s or kg ⅐ m2/s in SI units and lb-ft-sec in U.S. customary units.
As in the case of linear impulse and linear momentum, the equation
of angular impulse and angular momentum is a vector equation where
changes in direction as well as magnitude may occur during the interval
of integration. Under these conditions, it is necessary to express ΣMO

Article 3/10

Angular Impulse and Angular Momentum

and HO in component form and then combine the integrated components. The x-component of Eq. 3/33a is

͵
m(v y Ϫ v z) ϩ ͵
(HOx)1 ϩ

or

z

t1

1

y

t2

t2

t1

ΣMOx dt ϭ (HOx)2
ΣMOx dt ϭ m(vz y Ϫ vy z)2

(3/33b)

where the subscripts 1 and 2 refer to the values of the respective quantities
at times t1 and t2. Similar expressions exist for the y- and z-components of
the angular impulse-momentum equation.

Plane-Motion Applications
The foregoing angular-impulse and angular-momentum relations have
been developed in their general three-dimensional forms. Most of the applications of interest to us, however, can be analyzed as plane-motion problems where moments are taken about a single axis normal to the plane of
motion. In this case, the angular momentum may change magnitude and
sense, but the direction of the vector remains unaltered.
Thus, for a particle of mass m moving along a curved path in the x-y
plane, Fig. 3/16, the angular momenta about O at points 1 and 2 have the
magnitudes (HO)1 ϭ ͉r1 ؋ mv1 ͉ ϭ mv1d1 and (HO)2 ϭ ͉r2 ؋ mv2͉ ϭ
mv2d2, respectively. In the illustration both (HO)1 and (HO)2 are represented in the counterclockwise sense in accord with the direction of the
moment of the linear momentum. The scalar form of Eq. 3/33a applied to
the motion between points 1 and 2 during the time interval t1 to t2 becomes

(HO)1 ϩ

͵

t2

t1

ΣMO dt ϭ (HO)2

mv1d1 ϩ

or

͵

t2

t1

ΣFr sin ␪ dt ϭ mv2d2

y

mv2

r2

2

θ

d2

ΣF
r

(HO)2 = mv2 d2

d1
r1

mv1
1
x

O
(HO)1 = mv1d1

Σ MO = Σ Fr sin θ

Figure 3/16

207

208

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

This example should help clarify the relation between the scalar and
vector forms of the angular impulse-momentum relations.
Whereas Eq. 3/33 clearly stresses that the external angular impulse
causes a change in the angular momentum, the order of the terms in
Eqs. 3/33a and 3/33b corresponds to the natural sequence of events.
Equation 3/33a is analogous to Eq. 3/27a, just as Eq. 3/31 is analogous
to Eq. 3/25.
As was the case for linear-momentum problems, we encounter impulsive (large magnitude, short duration) and nonimpulsive forces in
angular-momentum problems. The treatment of these forces was discussed in Art. 3/9.
Equations 3/25 and 3/31 add no new basic information since they
are merely alternative forms of Newton’s second law. We will discover
in subsequent chapters, however, that the motion equations expressed
in terms of the time rate of change of momentum are applicable to the
motion of rigid and nonrigid bodies and provide a very general and powerful approach to many problems. The full generality of Eq. 3/31 is usually not required to describe the motion of a single particle or the plane
motion of rigid bodies, but it does have important use in the analysis of
the space motion of rigid bodies introduced in Chapter 7.

Conservation of Angular Momentum
If the resultant moment about a ﬁxed point O of all forces acting on
a particle is zero during an interval of time, Eq. 3/31 requires that its
angular momentum HO about that point remain constant. In this case,
the angular momentum of the particle is said to be conserved. Angular
momentum may be conserved about one axis but not about another
axis. A careful examination of the free-body diagram of the particle will
disclose whether the moment of the resultant force on the particle about
a ﬁxed point is zero, in which case, the angular momentum about that
point is unchanged (conserved).
Consider now the motion of two particles a and b which interact
during an interval of time. If the interactive forces F and ϪF between
them are the only unbalanced forces acting on the particles during the
interval, it follows that the moments of the equal and opposite forces
about any ﬁxed point O not on their line of action are equal and opposite. If we apply Eq. 3/33 to particle a and then to particle b and add the
two equations, we obtain ⌬Ha ϩ ⌬Hb ϭ 0 (where all angular momenta
are referred to point O). Thus, the total angular momentum for the system of the two particles remains constant during the interval, and we
write
⌬HO ϭ 0

or

(HO)1 ϭ (HO)2

(3/34)

which expresses the principle of conservation of angular momentum.

Article 3/10

Angular Impulse and Angular Momentum

SAMPLE PROBLEM 3/24

209

z

A small sphere has the position and velocity indicated in the
ﬁgure and is acted upon by the force F. Determine the angular mo˙
mentum HO about point O and the time derivative HO.

F = 10 N
2 kg
O

Solution.

v = 5 m/s

3m

We begin with the deﬁnition of angular momentum

and write

4m

HO ϭ r ؋ mv

x

y

6m

ϭ (3i ϩ 6j ϩ 4k) ؋ 2(5j)
ϭ Ϫ40i ϩ 30k N ⅐ m/s

From Eq. 3/31,

Ans.

˙
HO ϭ MO
ϭr؋F
ϭ (3i ϩ 6j ϩ 4k) ؋ 10k
ϭ 60i Ϫ 30j N ⅐ m

Ans.

As with moments of forces, the position vector must run from the reference
point (O in this case) to the line of action of the linear momentum mv. Here r
runs directly to the particle.

SAMPLE PROBLEM 3/25
A comet is in the highly eccentric orbit shown in the ﬁgure. Its
speed at the most distant point A, which is at the outer edge of the
solar system, is vA ϭ 740 m/s. Determine its speed at the point B of
closest approach to the sun.

B

O

A

Solution.

Because the only signiﬁcant force acting on the comet,
the gravitational force exerted on it by the sun, is central (points to
the sun center O), angular momentum about O is conserved.
(HO)A ϭ (HO)B

6000(106) km
75(106) km

mrAvA ϭ mrBvB
vB ϭ

rAvA
rB

ϭ

6000(106 )740
75(106 )

vB ϭ 59 200 m/s

Ans.

(Not to scale)

210

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

SAMPLE PROBLEM 3/26

m

The assembly of the light rod and two end masses is at rest
when it is struck by the falling wad of putty traveling with speed v1
as shown. The putty adheres to and travels with the right-hand end
˙
mass. Determine the angular velocity ␪ 2 of the assembly just after
impact. The pivot at O is frictionless, and all three masses may be
assumed to be particles.

v1
O
2m

4m

l

2l

Solution.

If we ignore the angular impulses associated with the weights during the collision process, then system angular momentum about O is conserved
during the impact.
(HO )1 ϭ (HO )2

˙
˙
mv1l ϭ (m ϩ 2m)(l ␪ 2 )l ϩ 4m(2l ␪ 2 )2l
˙
␪2 ϭ

v1
CW
19l

Ans.

Note that each angular-momentum term is written in the form mvd, and the
ﬁnal transverse velocities are expressed as radial distances times the common
˙
ﬁnal angular velocity ␪ 2.

SAMPLE PROBLEM 3/27

O

A small mass particle is given an initial velocity v0 tangent to the horizontal
rim of a smooth hemispherical bowl at a radius r0 from the vertical centerline, as
shown at point A. As the particle slides past point B, a distance h below A and a
distance r from the vertical centerline, its velocity v makes an angle ␪ with the
horizontal tangent to the bowl through B. Determine ␪.

A

v0
r0
h
r

B

v θ

Solution.

The forces on the particle are its weight and the normal reaction exerted by the smooth surface of the bowl. Neither force exerts a moment about
the axis O-O, so that angular momentum is conserved about that axis. Thus,

ᕡ [(HO)1 ϭ (HO)2]

mv0 r0 ϭ mvr cos ␪

Helpful Hint

ᕡ The angle ␪ is measured in the plane

Also, energy is conserved so that E1 ϭ E2. Thus
[T1 ϩ V1 ϭ T2 ϩ V2]

tangent to the hemispherical surface
at B.

1
1
2
2
2 mv0 ϩ mgh ϭ 2 mv ϩ 0

v ϭ Ίv02 ϩ 2gh
Eliminating v and substituting r2 ϭ r02 Ϫ h2 give
v0 r0 ϭ Ίv02 ϩ 2ghΊr02 Ϫ h2 cos ␪
␪ ϭ cosϪ1

O

1
2gh

Ans.

Ί1 ϩ v Ί
0

2

h2
1Ϫ 2
r0

Article 3/10

PROBLEMS
Introductory Problems
3/215 Determine the magnitude HO of the angular momentum of the 2-kg sphere about point O (a) by
using the vector deﬁnition of angular momentum
and (b) by using an equivalent scalar approach.
The center of the sphere lies in the x-y plane.

Problems

211

3/219 At a certain instant, the particle of mass m has the
position and velocity shown in the ﬁgure, and it is
acted upon by the force F. Determine its angular
momentum about point O and the time rate of
change of this angular momentum.
z

F
y

7 m/s
m

O

2 kg

a

b
c

5m
12 m

O

v

45°

x

y

x

Problem 3/215

Problem 3/219

3/216 The 3-kg sphere moves in the x-y plane and has the
indicated velocity at a particular instant. Determine its (a) linear momentum, (b) angular momentum about point O, and (c) kinetic energy.

3/220 The small spheres, which have the masses and initial velocities shown in the ﬁgure, strike and become attached to the spiked ends of the rod, which
is freely pivoted at O and is initially at rest. Determine the angular velocity ␻ of the assembly after
impact. Neglect the mass of the rod.

y
3 kg

m

45°

3v

O

2m

4 m /s
L

v

L
2m
60°

x

O
Problem 3/216

3/217 A particle with a mass of 4 kg has a position vector
in meters given by r ϭ 3t2i Ϫ 2tj Ϫ 3tk, where t is
the time in seconds. For t ϭ 3 s determine the magnitude of the angular momentum of the particle
and the magnitude of the moment of all forces on
the particle, both about the origin of coordinates.
3/218 A 0.4-kg particle is located at the position r1 ϭ 2i ϩ
3j ϩ k m and has the velocity v1 ϭ i ϩ j ϩ 2k m/s
at time t ϭ 0. If the particle is acted upon by a single force which has the moment MO ϭ (4 ϩ 2t)i ϩ

΂3 Ϫ 1t2΃j
2

ϩ 5k N ⅐ m about the origin O of the

coordinate system in use, determine the angular
momentum about O of the particle when t ϭ 4 s.

Problem 3/220

212

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

3/221 The particle of mass m is gently nudged from the
equilibrium position A and subsequently slides
along the smooth circular path which lies in a vertical plane. Determine the magnitude of its angular momentum about point O as it passes (a) point
B and (b) point C. In each case, determine the time
rate of change of HO.

3/223 The assembly starts from rest and reaches an angular speed of 150 rev/min under the action of a
20-N force T applied to the string for t seconds. Determine t. Neglect friction and all masses except
those of the four 3-kg spheres, which may be
treated as particles.
400 mm

A
3 kg

m

r

100 mm
B

O

T
Problem 3/223
C

Representative Problems

Problem 3/221

3/222 A wad of clay of mass m1 with an initial horizontal
velocity v1 hits and adheres to the massless rigid
bar which supports the body of mass m2, which can
be assumed to be a particle. The pendulum assembly is freely pivoted at O and is initially stationary.
˙
Determine the angular velocity ␪ of the combined
body just after impact. Why is linear momentum of
the system not conserved?

3/224 Just after launch from the earth, the space-shuttle
orbiter is in the 37 ϫ 137–mi orbit shown. At the
apogee point A, its speed is 17,290 mi/hr. If nothing
were done to modify the orbit, what would its speed
be at the perigee P? Neglect aerodynamic drag.
(Note that the normal practice is to add speed at A,
which raises the perigee altitude to a value that is
well above the bulk of the atmosphere.)

17,290 mi/hr
O
P

A

O

L/2
m1
v1
L/2

137 mi
37 mi
m2
Problem 3/222

Problem 3/224

Article 3/10
3/225 A small 4-oz particle is projected with a horizontal
velocity of 6 ft/sec into the top A of the smooth circular guide ﬁxed in the vertical plane. Calculate
˙
the time rate of change HB of angular momentum
about point B when the particle passes the bottom
of the guide at C.
y
A

Problems

213

3/227 The 6-kg sphere and 4-kg block (shown in section)
are secured to the arm of negligible mass which rotates in the vertical plane about a horizontal axis
at O. The 2-kg plug is released from rest at A and
falls into the recess in the block when the arm has
reached the horizontal position. An instant before
engagement, the arm has an angular velocity
␻0 ϭ 2 rad/s. Determine the angular velocity ␻ of
the arm immediately after the plug has wedged
itself in the block.

6 ft /sec
2 kg
A

10″
B

x
600 mm
C

6 kg

300
mm

ω0

O
4 kg

500
mm

Problem 3/225

3/226 The small particle of mass m and its restraining
cord are spinning with an angular velocity ␻ on
the horizontal surface of a smooth disk, shown in
section. As the force F is slightly relaxed, r increases and ␻ changes. Determine the rate of
change of ␻ with respect to r and show that the
work done by F during a movement dr equals the
change in kinetic energy of the particle.
ω

r
m

Problem 3/227

3/228 The two spheres of equal mass m are able to slide
along the horizontal rotating rod. If they are initially latched in position a distance r from the rotating axis with the assembly rotating freely with
an angular velocity ␻0, determine the new angular
velocity ␻ after the spheres are released and ﬁnally
assume positions at the ends of the rod at a radial
distance of 2r. Also ﬁnd the fraction n of the initial
kinetic energy of the system which is lost. Neglect
the small mass of the rod and shaft.
2r
2r
r

m

r

ω0

m

F
Problem 3/226

Problem 3/228

214

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

3/229 The speed of Mercury at its point A of maximum
distance from the sun is 38 860 m/s. Determine its
speeds at points B and P.

3/231 Determine the magnitude HO of the angular momentum about the launch point O of the projectile
of mass m, which is launched with speed v0 at the
angle ␪ as shown (a) at the instant of launch and
(b) at the instant of impact. Qualitatively account
for the two results. Neglect atmospheric resistance.

B
56.70(106) km

v0

vA = 38 860 m/s
O θ

Sun
P

A

O

A

Mercury
Problem 3/231

46(106) km

3/232 The particle of mass m is launched from point O
with a horizontal velocity u at time t ϭ 0. Determine its angular momentum HO relative to point O
as a function of time.

69.82(106) km

m

u

Problem 3/229

O

3/230 A small 0.1-kg particle is given a velocity of 2 m/s
on the horizontal x-y plane and is guided by the
ﬁxed curved rail. Friction is negligible. As the particle crosses the y-axis at A, its velocity is in the
x-direction, and as it crosses the x-axis at B, its
velocity makes a 60Њ angle with the x-axis. The radius of curvature of the path at B is 500 mm. Determine the time rate of change of the angular
momentum HO of the particle about the z-axis
through O at both A and B.

y

x

Problem 3/232

3/233 A particle of mass m is released from rest in position A and then slides down the smooth verticalplane track. Determine its angular momentum
about both points A and D (a) as it passes position
B and (b) as it passes position C.

z
y

D

x
A

60°

200
mm

300
mm

B

m

ρ

A

30°

O
B
C
Problem 3/230

Problem 3/233

ρ

Article 3/10
3/234 At the point A of closest approach to the sun, a
comet has a velocity vA ϭ 188,500 ft/sec. Determine the radial and transverse components of its
velocity vB at point B, where the radial distance
from the sun is 75(106) mi.

v

z

y
B

B

75 (106) mi

vA
A

S

A
O

50 (106)
mi

Problem 3/234

3/235 A pendulum consists of two 3.2-kg concentrated
masses positioned as shown on a light but rigid bar.
The pendulum is swinging through the vertical position with a clockwise angular velocity ␻ ϭ 6 rad/s
when a 50-g bullet traveling with velocity v ϭ 300
m/s in the direction shown strikes the lower mass
and becomes embedded in it. Calculate the angular
velocity ␻Ј which the pendulum has immediately
after impact and ﬁnd the maximum angular deﬂection ␪ of the pendulum.

200 mm
O
θ

400 mm
ω

20°

v
Problem 3/235

215

3/236 The 1.5-lb sphere moves in a horizontal plane and
is controlled by a cord which is reeled in and out
below the table in such a way that the center of the
sphere is conﬁned to the path given by (x2 /25) ϩ
(y2 /16) ϭ 1 where x and y are in feet. If the speed
of the sphere is vA ϭ 8 ft/sec as it passes point A,
determine the tension TB in the cord as the sphere
passes point B. Friction is negligible.

vr
vθ

Problems

T
Problem 3/236

x

216

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

3/237 A particle is launched with a horizontal velocity v0 ϭ
0.55 m/s from the 30Њ position shown and then slides
without friction along the funnel-like surface. Determine the angle ␪ which its velocity vector makes
with the horizontal as the particle passes level O-O.
The value of r is 0.9 m.

v0

m
30°

᭤3/238 The assembly of two 5-kg spheres is rotating freely
about the vertical axis at 40 rev/min with ␪ ϭ 90Њ.
If the force F which maintains the given position is
increased to raise the base collar and reduce ␪ to
60Њ, determine the new angular velocity ␻. Also determine the work U done by F in changing the conﬁguration of the system. Assume that the mass of
the arms and collars is negligible.

m

100 mm

r
O

3
m 00
m

O
0.15r
ω

Problem 3/237

m

0

30

5 kg

3
m 00
m

θ

F

Problem 3/238

m

5 kg

Article 3/12

Impact

217

SECTION D SPECIAL APPLICATIONS
3/11

Introduction

The basic principles and methods of particle kinetics were developed and illustrated in the ﬁrst three sections of this chapter. This
treatment included the direct use of Newton’s second law, the equations
of work and energy, and the equations of impulse and momentum. We
paid special attention to the kind of problem for which each of the approaches was most appropriate.
Several topics of specialized interest in particle kinetics will be
brieﬂy treated in Section D:
1. Impact
2. Central-force motion
3. Relative motion
These topics involve further extension and application of the fundamental principles of dynamics, and their study will help to broaden your
background in mechanics.

3/12

Impact

The principles of impulse and momentum have important use in describing the behavior of colliding bodies. Impact refers to the collision
between two bodies and is characterized by the generation of relatively
large contact forces which act over a very short interval of time. It is important to realize that an impact is a very complex event involving material deformation and recovery and the generation of heat and sound.
Small changes in the impact conditions may cause large changes in the
impact process and thus in the conditions immediately following the impact. Therefore, we must be careful not to rely heavily on the results of
impact calculations.

Direct Central Impact
v1 > v2
As an introduction to impact, we consider the collinear motion of
two spheres of masses m1 and m2, Fig. 3/17a, traveling with velocities v1 (a) Before
m1
m2
and v2. If v1 is greater than v2, collision occurs with the contact forces diimpact
rected along the line of centers. This condition is called direct central
v0
impact.
(b) Maximum
Following initial contact, a short period of increasing deformation
m1 m 2
deformation
during impact
takes place until the contact area between the spheres ceases to increase. At this instant, both spheres, Fig. 3/17b, are moving with the
v1′ < v2′
same velocity v0. During the remainder of contact, a period of restoration occurs during which the contact area decreases to zero. In the ﬁnal (c) After impact
m1
m2
condition shown in part c of the ﬁgure, the spheres now have new velocities v1Ј and v2Ј, where v1Ј must be less than v2Ј. All velocities are arbiFigure 3/17
trarily assumed positive to the right, so that with this scalar notation a
velocity to the left would carry a negative sign. If the impact is not

218

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

overly severe and if the spheres are highly elastic, they will regain their
original shape following the restoration. With a more severe impact and
with less elastic bodies, a permanent deformation may result.
Because the contact forces are equal and opposite during impact,
the linear momentum of the system remains unchanged, as discussed in
Art. 3/9. Thus, we apply the law of conservation of linear momentum
and write
m1v1 ϩ m2v2 ϭ m1v1Ј ϩ m2v2Ј

(3/35)

We assume that any forces acting on the spheres during impact, other
than the large internal forces of contact, are relatively small and produce negligible impulses compared with the impulse associated with
each internal impact force. In addition, we assume that no appreciable
change in the positions of the mass centers occurs during the short duration of the impact.

⎧
Deformation ⎪
⎨
period
⎪
⎩
⎧
Restoration ⎪
⎨
period
⎪
⎩

v1
m1

v2
Fd

m2

͵ F dt m [Ϫv Ј Ϫ (Ϫv )] v Ϫ v Ј
ϭ
eϭ
ϭ
v Ϫv
m [Ϫv Ϫ (Ϫv )]
͵ F dt
t

v0

v0

Coefﬁcient of Restitution
For given masses and initial conditions, the momentum equation
contains two unknowns, v1Ј and v2Ј. Clearly, we need an additional relationship to ﬁnd the ﬁnal velocities. This relationship must reﬂect the capacity of the contacting bodies to recover from the impact and can be
expressed by the ratio e of the magnitude of the restoration impulse to
the magnitude of the deformation impulse. This ratio is called the coefﬁcient of restitution.
Let Fr and Fd represent the magnitudes of the contact forces during the restoration and deformation periods, respectively, as shown in
Fig. 3/18. For particle 1 the definition of e together with the impulsemomentum equation give us
r

t0

1

1

0

0

1

1

0

1

1

0

t0

m1

Fr

v1′

m2
v2′

d

0

Similarly, for particle 2 we have

͵ F dt m (v Ј Ϫ v ) v Ј Ϫ v
eϭ
ϭ
ϭ
v Ϫv
m (v Ϫ v )
͵ F dt

Figure 3/18

t

t0

r

2

0

2

0

2

0

2

t0

0

2

0

2

d

We are careful in these equations to express the change of momentum
(and therefore ⌬v) in the same direction as the impulse (and thus the
force). The time for the deformation is taken as t0 and the total time of
contact is t. Eliminating v0 between the two expressions for e gives us
eϭ

v2Ј Ϫ v1Ј ͉relative velocity of separation ͉
ϭ
v1 Ϫ v 2
͉relative velocity of approach ͉

(3/36)

Article 3/12

Impact

If the two initial velocities v1 and v2 and the coefﬁcient of restitution
e are known, then Eqs. 3/35 and 3/36 give us two equations in the two
unknown ﬁnal velocities v1Ј and v2Ј.

Energy Loss During Impact
Impact phenomena are almost always accompanied by energy loss,
which may be calculated by subtracting the kinetic energy of the system
just after impact from that just before impact. Energy is lost through
the generation of heat during the localized inelastic deformation of the
material, through the generation and dissipation of elastic stress waves
within the bodies, and through the generation of sound energy.
According to this classical theory of impact, the value e ϭ 1 means
Coefficient of
that the capacity of the two particles to recover equals their tendency to restitution, e
deform. This condition is one of elastic impact with no energy loss. The
Perfectly elastic
1
value e ϭ 0, on the other hand, describes inelastic or plastic impact where
the particles cling together after collision and the loss of energy is a maxiGlass on glass
mum. All impact conditions lie somewhere between these two extremes.
Also, it should be noted that a coefﬁcient of restitution must be asSteel on steel
sociated with a pair of contacting bodies. The coefﬁcient of restitution is
frequently considered a constant for given geometries and a given comLead on lead
bination of contacting materials. Actually, it depends on the impact vePerfectly plastic
0
locity and approaches unity as the impact velocity approaches zero as
0
Relative impact velocity
shown schematically in Fig. 3/19. A handbook value for e is generally
Figure 3/19
unreliable.
Oblique Central Impact
We now extend the relationships developed for direct central impact
to the case where the initial and ﬁnal velocities are not parallel, Fig.
3/20. Here spherical particles of mass m1 and m2 have initial velocities
v1 and v2 in the same plane and approach each other on a collision
course, as shown in part a of the ﬁgure. The directions of the velocity
vectors are measured from the direction tangent to the contacting
surfaces, Fig. 3/20b. Thus, the initial velocity components along the
t- and n-axes are (v1)n ϭ Ϫv1 sin ␪1, (v1)t ϭ v1 cos ␪1, (v2)n ϭ v2 sin ␪2,
n
n

m1

m1

v1′
|F|

v1

θ1

θ 1′

θ2

θ 2′

F
t
m2

m2

–F
v2′

v2

0
0

t0
Time, t

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 3/20

(d)

(e)

t

219

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

and (v2)t ϭ v2 cos ␪2. Note that (v1)n is a negative quantity for the particular coordinate system and initial velocities shown.
The ﬁnal rebound conditions are shown in part c of the ﬁgure. The
impact forces are F and ϪF, as seen in part d of the ﬁgure. They vary
from zero to their peak value during the deformation portion of the impact and back again to zero during the restoration period, as indicated
in part e of the ﬁgure where t is the duration of the impact interval.
For given initial conditions of m1, m2, (v1)n, (v1)t, (v2)n, and (v2)t,
there will be four unknowns, namely, (v1Ј)n, (v1Ј)t, (v2Ј)n, and (v2Ј)t. The
four needed equations are obtained as follows:
(1) Momentum of the system is conserved in the n-direction. This
gives
m1(v1 )n ϩ m2(v2 )n ϭ m1(v1Ј)n ϩ m2(v2Ј)n
(2) and (3) The momentum for each particle is conserved in the
t-direction since there is no impulse on either particle in the t-direction.
Thus,
m1(v1 )t ϭ m1(v1Ј)t
m2(v2 )t ϭ m2(v2Ј)t
(4) The coefﬁcient of restitution, as in the case of direct central impact, is the positive ratio of the recovery impulse to the deformation impulse. Equation 3/36 applies, then, to the velocity components in the
n-direction. For the notation adopted with Fig. 3/20, we have
eϭ

(v2Ј)n Ϫ (v1Ј)n
(v1 )n Ϫ (v2 )n

Once the four ﬁnal velocity components are found, the angles ␪1Ј
and ␪2Ј of Fig. 3/20 may be easily determined.

© Silvestre Machado/SuperStock

220

Pool balls about to undergo impact.

Article 3/12

Impact

221

SAMPLE PROBLEM 3/28
The ram of a pile driver has a mass of 800 kg and is released from rest 2 m
above the top of the 2400-kg pile. If the ram rebounds to a height of 0.1 m after
impact with the pile, calculate (a) the velocity vpЈ of the pile immediately after
impact, (b) the coefﬁcient of restitution e, and (c) the percentage loss of energy
due to the impact.

2 m drop
0.1 m
rebound

Solution.

Conservation of energy during free fall gives the initial and ﬁnal velocities of the ram from v ϭ Ί2gh. Thus,
vr ϭ Ί2(9.81)(2) ϭ 6.26 m/s

vrЈ ϭ Ί2(9.81)(0.1) ϭ 1.401 m/s

ᕡ (a) Conservation of momentum (G1 ϭ G2) for the system of the ram and pile gives
800(6.26) ϩ 0 ϭ 800(Ϫ1.401) ϩ 2400vpЈ

vpЈ ϭ 2.55 m/s

Ans.
vr

(b) The coefﬁcient of restitution yields
eϭ

͉rel. vel. separation ͉

eϭ

͉rel. vel. approach ͉

2.55 ϩ 1.401
ϭ 0.631
6.26 ϩ 0

Immediately
after
impact

Before
impact

vr′

ram

Ans.

pile

vp′

vp = 0

(c) The kinetic energy of the system just before impact is the same as the potential energy of the ram above the pile and is

y

T ϭ Vg ϭ mgh ϭ 800(9.81)(2) ϭ 15 700 J
Helpful Hint

The kinetic energy TЈ just after impact is
1

ᕡ The impulses of the weights of the

1

TЈ ϭ 2 (800)(1.401)2 ϩ 2 (2400)(2.55)2 ϭ 8620 J
The percentage loss of energy is, therefore,
15 700 Ϫ 8620
(100) ϭ 45.1%
15 700

Ans.

ram and pile are very small compared with the impulses of the impact forces and thus are neglected
during the impact.

50 ft /sec

SAMPLE PROBLEM 3/29
A ball is projected onto the heavy plate with a velocity of 50 ft/sec at the 30Њ
angle shown. If the effective coefﬁcient of restitution is 0.5, compute the rebound
velocity vЈ and its angle ␪Ј.

n
v′

1

θ′

30°

t
2

Solution.

Let the ball be denoted body 1 and the plate body 2. The mass of the
heavy plate may be considered inﬁnite and its corresponding velocity zero after
impact. The coefﬁcient of restitution is applied to the velocity components normal to the plate in the direction of the impact force and gives

ᕡ

eϭ

(v2Ј)n Ϫ (v1Ј)n
(v1 )n Ϫ (v2 )n

0.5 ϭ

0 Ϫ (v1Ј)n
Ϫ50 sin 30Њ Ϫ 0

Fimpact

(v1Ј)n ϭ 12.5 ft/sec

Momentum of the ball in the t-direction is unchanged since, with assumed
smooth surfaces, there is no force acting on the ball in that direction. Thus,
m(v1 )t ϭ m(v1Ј)t

(v1Ј)t ϭ (v1)t ϭ 50 cos 30Њ ϭ 43.3 ft/sec

The rebound velocity vЈ and its angle ␪Ј are then
vЈ ϭ Ί(v1Ј)n2 ϩ (v1Ј)t2 ϭ Ί12.52 ϩ 43.32 ϭ 45.1 ft/sec
␪Ј ϭ tanϪ1

΂ (v Ј) ΃ ϭ tan ΂12.5΃ ϭ 16.10Њ
43.3
(v1Ј)n
1

t

Ϫ1

W << Fimpact

Ans.
Ans.

Helpful Hint

ᕡ We observe here that for inﬁnite
mass there is no way of applying the
principle of conservation of momentum for the system in the n-direction. From the free-body diagram of
the ball during impact, we note that
the impulse of the weight W is neglected since W is very small compared with the impact force.

222

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

SAMPLE PROBLEM 3/30
2

Spherical particle 1 has a velocity v1 ϭ 6 m/s in the direction shown and collides with spherical particle 2 of equal mass and diameter and initially at rest. If
the coefﬁcient of restitution for these conditions is e ϭ 0.6, determine the resulting motion of each particle following impact. Also calculate the percentage loss of
energy due to the impact.

v1
1
n

Solution.

The geometry at impact indicates that the normal n to the contacting surfaces makes an angle ␪ ϭ 30Њ with the direction of v1, as indicated in the
ᕡ ﬁgure. Thus, the initial velocity components are (v1)n ϭ v1 cos 30Њ ϭ 6 cos 30Њ ϭ
5.20 m/s, (v1)t ϭ v1 sin 30Њ ϭ 6 sin 30Њ ϭ 3 m/s, and (v2)n ϭ (v2)t ϭ 0.
Momentum conservation for the two-particle system in the n-direction gives
m1(v1 )n ϩ m2(v2 )n ϭ m1(v1Ј)n ϩ m2(v2Ј)n

2r

θ
r
v1
n

or, with m1 ϭ m2,

v2′

5.20 ϩ 0 ϭ (v1Ј)n ϩ (v2Ј)n

(a)

v1′

2′

(v2Ј)n Ϫ (v1Ј)n
(v1 )n Ϫ (v2 )n

0.6 ϭ

2

(v2Ј)n Ϫ (v1Ј)n
5.20 Ϫ 0

(b)

1

ᕢ Simultaneous solution of Eqs. a and b yields
(v1Ј)n ϭ 1.039 m/s

v1

(v2Ј)n ϭ 4.16 m/s

m1(v1 )t ϭ m1(v1Ј)t

2

t
F

(v1Ј)t ϭ (v1 )t ϭ 3 m/s

m2(v2 )t ϭ m2(v2Ј)t

(v2Ј)t ϭ (v2 )t ϭ 0

F
1

The ﬁnal speeds of the particles are
v1Ј ϭ Ί(v1Ј)n2 ϩ (v1Ј)t2 ϭ Ί(1.039)2 ϩ 32 ϭ 3.17 m/s
v2Ј ϭ Ί(v2Ј)n ϩ (v2Ј)t ϭ
2

2

Ί(4.16)2

ϩ

02

ϭ 4.16 m/s

Ans.

Helpful Hints

Ans.

ᕡ Be sure to set up n- and t-coordinates

Ans.

which are, respectively, normal to
and tangent to the contacting surfaces. Calculation of the 30Њ angle is
critical to all that follows.

The angle ␪Ј which v1Ј makes with the t-direction is
␪Ј ϭ tanϪ1

΂ (v Ј) ΃ ϭ tan ΂1.039΃ ϭ 19.11Њ
3
(v1Ј)n
1

30°

n

Conservation of momentum for each particle holds in the t-direction because,
with assumed smooth surfaces, there is no force in the t-direction. Thus for particles 1 and 2, we have

ᕣ

t

1′

The coefﬁcient-of-restitution relationship is
eϭ

θ 1′

Ϫ1

t

The kinetic energies just before and just after impact, with m ϭ m1 ϭ m2, are
1
1
1
T ϭ 2 m1v12 ϩ 2 m2v22 ϭ 2 m(6)2 ϩ 0 ϭ 18m
TЈ ϭ 1 m1v1Ј2 ϩ 1 m2v2Ј2 ϭ 1 m(3.17)2 ϩ 1 m(4.16)2 ϭ 13.68m
2
2
2
2

four equations in four unknowns for
the standard problem of oblique central impact, only one pair of the
equations is coupled.

ᕣ We note that particle 2 has no initial

The percentage energy loss is then
͉⌬E ͉
18m Ϫ 13.68m
T Ϫ TЈ
(100) ϭ 24.0%
(100) ϭ
(100) ϭ
18m
E
T

ᕢ Note that, even though there are

Ans.

or final velocity component in the
t-direction. Hence, its ﬁnal velocity
v2Ј is restricted to the n-direction.

Article 3/12

PROBLEMS
Introductory Problems
3/239 Tennis balls are usually rejected if they fail to rebound to waist level when dropped from shoulder
level. If a ball just passes the test as indicated in
the ﬁgure, determine the coefﬁcient of restitution e
and the percentage n of the original energy lost
during the impact.

Problems

223

3/242 The two bodies have the masses and initial velocities shown in the ﬁgure. The coefﬁcient of restitution for the collision is e ϭ 0.3, and friction is
negligible. If the time duration of the collision is
0.025 s, determine the average impact force which
is exerted on the 3-kg body.
0.5 m/s
0.7 m/s
4 kg

3 kg

Problem 3/242

1600
mm
1100
mm

3/243 The sphere of mass m1 travels with an initial velocity v1 directed as shown and strikes the sphere
of mass m2. For a given coefﬁcient of restitution e,
determine the mass ratio m1/m2 which results in
m1 being motionless after the impact.
v1

Problem 3/239

3/240 If the tennis ball of Prob. 3/239 has a coefﬁcient of
restitution e ϭ 0.8 during impact with the court
surface, determine the velocity v0 with which the
ball must be thrown downward from the 1600-mm
shoulder level if it is return to the same level after
bouncing once on the court surface.
3/241 Compute the ﬁnal velocities v1Ј and v2Ј after collision
of the two cylinders which slide on the smooth horizontal shaft. The coefﬁcient of restitution is e ϭ 0.6.
v1 = 7 m/s

v2 = 5 m/s

m2

m1
Problem 3/243

3/244 Three identical steel cylinders are free to slide on
the ﬁxed horizontal shaft. Cylinders 2 and 3 are at
rest and are approached by cylinder 1 at a speed u.
Express the ﬁnal speed v of cylinder 3 in terms of u
and the coefﬁcient of restitution e.
u

1

2
Problem 3/244

m1 = 2 kg

m2 = 3 kg

Problem 3/241

3

224

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

3/245 Cylinder A is moving to the right with speed v
when it impacts the initially stationary cylinder B.
Both cylinders have mass m, and the coefﬁcient of
restitution for the collision is e. Determine the
maximum deﬂection ␦ of the spring of modulus k.
Neglect friction.

3/248 If the center of the ping-pong ball is to clear the
net as shown, at what height h should the ball be
horizontally served? Also determine h2. The coefﬁcient of restitution for the impacts between ball
and table is e ϭ 0.9, and the radius of the ball is
r ϭ 0.75 in.
v0

k
v

A

m

m

h

B

9″

h2

Problem 3/245
Problem 3/248

3/246 Car B is initially stationary and is struck by car A,
which is moving with speed v. The mass of car B is
pm, where m is the mass of car A and p is a positive
constant. If the coefﬁcient or restitution is e ϭ 0.1,
express the speeds vAЈ and vBЈ of the two cars at the
end of the impact in terms of p and v. Evaluate
your expressions for p ϭ 0.5.
m

pm
v

A

3/249 In the selection of the ram of a pile driver, it is desired that the ram lose all of its kinetic energy at
each blow. Hence, the velocity of the ram is zero
immediately after impact. The mass of each pile to
be driven is 300 kg, and experience has shown that
a coefﬁcient of restitution of 0.3 can be expected.
What should be the mass m of the ram? Compute
the velocity v of the pile immediately after impact
if the ram is dropped from a height of 4 m onto the
pile. Also compute the energy loss ⌬E due to impact at each blow.

B

Problem 3/246

3/247 Determine the coefﬁcient of restitution e for a steel
ball dropped from rest at a height h above a heavy
horizontal steel plate if the height of the second rebound is h2.

m

4m

h

300 kg
h2
3m

Problem 3/247
Problem 3/249

Article 3/12
3/250 Freight car A of mass mA is rolling to the right
when it collides with freight car B of mass mB initially at rest. If the two cars are coupled together
at impact, show that the fractional loss of energy
equals mB/(mA ϩ mB).

Problems

225

3/252 Determine the value of the coefﬁcient of restitution e which results in the ﬁnal velocity vЈ being
perpendicular to the initial velocity v.

60°
v

A

B
Problem 3/250
v′

Representative Problems

Problem 3/252

3/251 Pool ball B is to be shot into the side pocket D by
banking it off the cushion at C. Specify the location
x of the cushion impact for coefﬁcients of restitution (a) e ϭ 1 and (b) e ϭ 0.8.

v′

v

D
A

3/253 Determine the value of the coefﬁcient of restitution e for which the outgoing angle is one-half of
the incoming angle ␪ as shown. Evaluate your general expression for ␪ ϭ 40Њ.

d/2

B

θ

θ
––
2

Problem 3/253
v
d/2
C

x
d
Problem 3/251

226

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

3/254 The ﬁgure shows n spheres of equal mass m suspended in a line by wires of equal length so that
the spheres are almost touching each other. If
sphere 1 is released from the dashed position and
strikes sphere 2 with a velocity v1, write an expression for the velocity vn of the nth sphere immediately after being struck by the one adjacent to it.
The common coefﬁcient of restitution is e.

3/257 A basketball traveling with the velocity shown in
the ﬁgure strikes the backboard at A. If the coefﬁcient of restitution for this impact is e ϭ 0.84, determine the required distance h above the hoop if
the ball is to arrive at the center B of the hoop.
Carry out two solutions: (a) an approximate solution obtained by neglecting the effects of gravity
from A to B and (b) a solution which accounts for
gravity from A to B. Neglect the diameter of the
ball compared with h.

24 ft/sec
40°
1

2

3

v1

vn

h

Problem 3/254

3/255 The ball is released from position A and drops
0.75 m to the incline. If the coefﬁcient of restitution in the impact is e ϭ 0.85, determine the slant
range R.

B

A
0.75 m

15″
Problem 3/257

20°
R

C

Problem 3/255

3/256 A projectile is launched from point A and has a
horizontal range L1 as shown. If the coefﬁcient of
restitution at B is e, determine the distance L2.

A

A

n

B
L1

L2
Problem 3/256

Article 3/12
3/258 The two cars collide at right angles in the intersection of two icy roads. Car A has a mass of 1200 kg
and car B has a mass of 1600 kg. The cars become
entangled and move off together with a common
velocity vЈ in the direction indicated. If car A was
traveling 50 km/h at the instant of impact, compute the corresponding velocity of car B just before
impact.

Problems

227

3/260 A 0.1-kg meteor and a 1000-kg spacecraft have the
indicated absolute velocities just before colliding.
The meteor punches a hole entirely through the
spacecraft. Instruments indicate that the velocity
of the meteor relative to the spacecraft just after
the collision is vm/sЈ ϭ Ϫ1880i Ϫ 6898j m/s. Determine the direction ␪ of the absolute velocity of the
spacecraft after the collision.

y

y
v′

vB

30°

vm = 7000 m/s

B

x
vs = 2000 m/s

A

vA = 50 km/h

θ

x
vs′

z

Problem 3/258

3/259 The two identical steel balls moving with initial velocities vA and vB collide as shown. If the coefﬁcient
of restitution is e ϭ 0.7, determine the velocity of
each ball just after impact and the percentage loss
n of system kinetic energy.
y
vA = 6 ft /sec

Problem 3/260

3/261 Two identical hockey pucks moving with initial velocities vA and vB collide as shown. If the coefﬁcient
of restitution is e ϭ 0.75, determine the velocity
(magnitude and direction ␪ with respect to the positive x-axis) of each puck just after impact. Also
calculate the percentage loss n of system kinetic
energy.

30°

A

y
x

B

vA = 6 m/s

A

B
x
30°

vB = 8 ft /sec

vB = 10 m/s
Problem 3/259
Problem 3/261

228

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

3/262 Sphere A collides with sphere B as shown in the
ﬁgure. If the coefﬁcient of restitution is e ϭ 0.5, determine the x- and y-components of the velocity of
each sphere immediately after impact. Motion is
conﬁned to the x-y plane.
y

vB = 12 m/s

2 kg

10 kg

3/264 During a pregame warmup period, two basketballs
collide above the hoop when in the positions
shown. Just before impact, ball 1 has a velocity v1
which makes a 30Њ angle with the horizontal. If the
velocity v2 of ball 2 just before impact has the same
magnitude as v1, determine the two possible values
of the angle ␪, measured from the horizontal,
which will cause ball 1 to go directly through the
center of the basket. The coefﬁcient of restitution
is e ϭ 0.8.
2
v2

30°
20°

x

1

θ

30°

B
45°

A
v1′

vA = 3 m/s
Problem 3/262

3/263 Determine the coefﬁcient of restitution e which
will allow the ball to bounce down the steps as
shown. The tread and riser dimensions, d and h,
respectively, are the same for every step, and the
ball bounces the same distance hЈ above each step.
What horizontal velocity vx is required so that the
ball lands in the center of each tread?

d
h

h′

Problem 3/263

v1

Problem 3/264

Article 3/12
3/265 The 0.5-kg cylinder A is released from rest from the
position shown and drops the distance h1 ϭ 0.6 m.
It then collides with the 0.4-kg block B; the coefﬁcient of restitution is e ϭ 0.8. Determine the maximum downward displacement h2 of block B.
Neglect all friction and assume that block B is initially held in place by a hidden mechanism until
the collision begins. The two springs of modulus
k ϭ 500 N/m are initially unstretched, and the distance d ϭ 0.8 m.

B

A

A
h1
mB
B

k

k
10′
h2

d

d
Problem 3/265

229

᭤3/266 A child throws a ball from point A with a speed of
50 ft/sec. It strikes the wall at point B and then returns exactly to point A. Determine the necessary
angle ␣ if the coefﬁcient of restitution in the wall
impact is e ϭ 0.5.

α

mA

Problems

Problem 3/266

230

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

3/13

Central-Force Motion

When a particle moves under the inﬂuence of a force directed toward a ﬁxed center of attraction, the motion is called central-force motion. The most common example of central-force motion is the orbital
movement of planets and satellites. The laws which govern this motion
were deduced from observation of the motions of the planets by J. Kepler
(1571–1630). An understanding of central-force motion is required to
design high-altitude rockets, earth satellites, and space vehicles.

Motion of a Single Body
Consider a particle of mass m, Fig. 3/21, moving under the action of
the central gravitational attraction
v

Focus

FϭG

m

dθ

θ
m0

Directrix

r F
x
Path
d

Figure 3/21

mm0
r2

where m0 is the mass of the attracting body, which is assumed to be
ﬁxed, G is the universal gravitational constant, and r is the distance between the centers of the masses. The particle of mass m could represent
the earth moving about the sun, the moon moving about the earth, or a
satellite in its orbital motion about the earth above the atmosphere.
The most convenient coordinate system to use is polar coordinates
in the plane of motion since F will always be in the negative r-direction
and there is no force in the ␪-direction.
Equations 3/8 may be applied directly for the r- and ␪-directions to
give
ϪG

mm0
r2

˙
ϭ m(r Ϫ r ␪ 2)
¨

(3/37)

¨
0 ϭ m(r ␪ ϩ 2r ˙ )
˙␪
The second of the two equations when multiplied by r/m is seen to be
˙
the same as d(r2 ␪ )/dt ϭ 0, which is integrated to give

˙
r2 ␪ ϭ h,

a constant

(3/38)

The physical signiﬁcance of Eq. 3/38 is made clear when we note
that the angular momentum r ؋ mv of m about m0 has the magnitude
˙
mr2 ␪ . Thus, Eq. 3/38 merely states that the angular momentum of m
about m0 remains constant (is conserved). This statement is easily deduced from Eq. 3/31, which shows that the angular momentum HO remains constant (is conserved) if there is no moment acting on the
particle about a ﬁxed point O.
We observe that during time dt, the radius vector sweeps out an
1
area, shaded in Fig. 3/21, equal to dA ϭ (2 r)(r d␪). Therefore, the rate at

˙ 1 ˙
which area is swept by the radius vector is A ϭ 2 r2 ␪ , which is constant according to Eq. 3/38. This conclusion is expressed in Kepler’s second law of
planetary motion, which states that the areas swept through in equal
times are equal.

Article 3/13

Central-Force Motion

231

The shape of the path followed by m may be obtained by solving the
ﬁrst of Eqs. 3/37, with the time t eliminated through combination with
Eq. 3/38. To this end the mathematical substitution r ϭ 1/u is useful.
r
r
r
Thus, ˙ ϭ Ϫ(1/u2)u, which from Eq. 3/38 becomes ˙ ϭ Ϫh(u/ ␪ ) or ˙ ϭ
˙
˙˙
˙
Ϫh(du/d␪). The second time derivative is ¨ ϭ Ϫh(d 2u/d␪ 2) ␪ , which by
r
r
combining with Eq. 3/38, becomes ¨ ϭ Ϫh2u2(d2u/d␪ 2). Substitution into
the ﬁrst of Eqs. 3/37 now gives
ϪGm0u2 ϭ Ϫh2 u2

d2 u 1 2 4
Ϫ hu
u
d␪2

or
Gm0
d2 u
ϩuϭ 2
2
d␪
h

(3/39)

which is a nonhomogeneous linear differential equation.
The solution of this familiar second-order equation may be veriﬁed
by direct substitution and is
uϭ

Gm0
1
ϭ C cos (␪ ϩ ␦) ϩ 2
r
h

where C and ␦ are the two integration constants. The phase angle ␦ may
be eliminated by choosing the x-axis so that r is a minimum when ␪ ϭ 0.
Thus,
Gm0
1
ϭ C cos ␪ ϩ 2
r
h

(3/40)

Conic Sections
The interpretation of Eq. 3/40 requires a knowledge of the equations for conic sections. We recall that a conic section is formed by the
locus of a point which moves so that the ratio e of its distance from
a point (focus) to a line (directrix) is constant. Thus, from Fig. 3/21,
e ϭ r/(d Ϫ r cos ␪), which may be rewritten as

Hyperbola e > 1
Parabola e = 1
Ellipse e < 1

m
e=0

Circle

1 1
1
ϭ cos ␪ ϩ
r d
ed

eϭ

h2 C
Gm0

m0

(3/41)
2b

which is the same form as Eq. 3/40. Thus, we see that the motion of m is
along a conic section with d ϭ 1/C and ed ϭ h2/(Gm0), or
(3/42)

The three cases to be investigated correspond to e Ͻ 1 (ellipse), e ϭ
1 (parabola), and e Ͼ 1 (hyperbola). The trajectory for each of these
cases is shown in Fig. 3/22.

v

r
θ

Apogee
a(1 + e)

a(1 – e)

2a

Figure 3/22

Perigee

232

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

Case 1: ellipse (e Ͻ 1). From Eq. 3/41 we deduce that r is a minimum when ␪ ϭ 0 and is a maximum when ␪ ϭ ␲. Thus,
2a ϭ rmin ϩ rmax ϭ

ed
ed
ϩ
1ϩe 1Ϫe

or

aϭ

ed
1 Ϫ e2

With the distance d expressed in terms of a, Eq. 3/41 and the maximum
and minimum values of r may be written as
1 1 ϩ e cos ␪
ϭ
r
a(1 Ϫ e2)
rmin ϭ a(1 Ϫ e)

(3/43)

rmax ϭ a(1 ϩ e)

In addition, the relation b ϭ aΊ1 Ϫ e2, which comes from the geometry
of the ellipse, gives the expression for the semiminor axis. We see that
the ellipse becomes a circle with r ϭ a when e ϭ 0. Equation 3/43 is an
expression of Kepler’s ﬁrst law, which says that the planets move in elliptical orbits around the sun as a focus.
The period ␶ for the elliptical orbit is the total area A of the ellipse
˙
divided by the constant rate A at which the area is swept through.
Thus, from Eq. 3/38,
␶ϭ

␲ab
A
ϭ
˙
˙
A 1 r2 ␪
2

or

␶ϭ

2␲ab
h

˙
We can eliminate reference to ␪ or h in the expression for ␶ by substituting Eq. 3/42, the identity d ϭ 1/C, the geometric relationships
a ϭ ed/(1 Ϫ e2) and b ϭ aΊ1 Ϫ e2 for the ellipse, and the equivalence
Gm0 ϭ gR2. The result after simplification is
␶ ϭ 2␲

a3/2
RΊg

(3/44)

Courtesy NASA/JPL-Caltech

In this equation note that R is the mean radius of the central attracting
body and g is the absolute value of the acceleration due to gravity at the
surface of the attracting body.
Equation 3/44 expresses Kepler’s third law of planetary motion
which states that the square of the period of motion is proportional to
the cube of the semimajor axis of the orbit.
Case 2: parabola (e ϭ 1). Equations 3/41 and 3/42 become
1 1
ϭ (1 ϩ cos ␪)
r d

and

h2C ϭ Gm0

The radius vector becomes inﬁnite as ␪ approaches ␲, so the dimension
a is inﬁnite.
Artist conception of the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter, which arrived at
Mars in March 2006.

Case 3: hyperbola (e Ͼ 1). From Eq. 3/41 we see that the radial
distance r becomes inﬁnite for the two values of the polar angle ␪1 and

Article 3/13

Ϫ␪1 deﬁned by cos ␪1 ϭ Ϫ1/e. Only branch I corresponding to Ϫ␪1 Ͻ ␪ Ͻ ␪1,
Fig. 3/23, represents a physically possible motion. Branch II corresponds
to angles in the remaining sector (with r negative). For this branch, positive r’s may be used if ␪ is replaced by ␪ Ϫ ␲ and Ϫr by r. Thus, Eq. 3/41
becomes
1
1
1
ϭ cos (␪ Ϫ ␲) ϩ
Ϫr d
ed

cos ␪
1
1
ϭϪ ϩ
r
ed
d

or

Energy Analysis
Now consider the energies of particle m. The system is conservative,
and the constant energy E of m is the sum of its kinetic energy T and
1
1
˙
potential energy V. The kinetic energy is T ϭ 2 mv2 ϭ 2 m(r 2 ϩ r2 ␪ 2)
˙
and the potential energy from Eq. 3/19 is V ϭ ϪmgR2/r.
Recall that g is the absolute acceleration due to gravity measured at
the surface of the attracting body, R is the radius of the attracting body,
and Gm0 ϭ gR2. Thus,
1

mgR2
r

This constant value of E can be determined from its value at ␪ ϭ 0,
˙
r
where ˙ ϭ 0, 1/r ϭ C ϩ gR2/h2 from Eq. 3/40, and r ␪ ϭ h/r from Eq.
3/38. Substituting this into the expression for E and simplifying yield
g2R4
2E
ϭ h 2C2 Ϫ 2
m
h
Now C is eliminated by substitution of Eq. 3/42, which may be written
as h2C ϭ egR2, to obtain

Ί

eϭϩ

1ϩ

2Eh2
mg2R4

(3/45)

The plus value of the radical is mandatory since by deﬁnition e is positive. We now see that for the
elliptical orbit

e Ͻ 1,

E is negative

parabolic orbit

e ϭ 1,

E is zero

hyperbolic orbit

e Ͼ 1,

E is positive

These conclusions, of course, depend on the arbitrary selection of the
datum condition for zero potential energy (V ϭ 0 when r ϭ ȍ).
The expression for the velocity v of m may be found from the energy
equation, which is
mgR2
1
2
ϭE
2 mv Ϫ
r

I

θ1

– θ1

But this expression contradicts the form of Eq. 3/40 where Gm0/h2 is necessarily positive. Thus branch II does not exist (except for repulsive forces).

˙
E ϭ 2 m(r 2 ϩ r2 ␪ 2) Ϫ
˙

Central-Force Motion

Figure 3/23

II

233

234

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

The total energy E is obtained from Eq. 3/45 by combining Eq. 3/42 and
1/C ϭ d ϭ a(1 Ϫ e2)/e to give for the elliptical orbit
EϭϪ

gR2m
2a

(3/46)

Substitution into the energy equation yields
v2 ϭ 2gR2

1
΂1 Ϫ 2a΃
r

(3/47)

from which the magnitude of the velocity may be computed for a particular orbit in terms of the radial distance r.
Next, combining the expressions for rmin and rmax corresponding to
perigee and apogee, Eq. 3/43, with Eq. 3/47 results in a pair of expressions for the respective velocities at these two positions for the elliptical
orbit:
rmax

Ίa Ί1 ϩ ee ϭ R Ίa Ί r
1Ϫ

vP ϭ R

g

g

min

(3/48)

rmin

Ίa Ί1 Ϫ ee ϭ R Ίa Ίr
1ϩ

vA ϭ R

g

g

max

Selected numerical data pertaining to the solar system are included
in Appendix D and are useful in applying the foregoing relationships to
problems in planetary motion.

Summary of Assumptions
The foregoing analysis is based on three assumptions:
1. The two bodies possess spherical mass symmetry so that they may
be treated as if their masses were concentrated at their centers, that
is, as if they were particles.
2. There are no forces present except the gravitational force which
each mass exerts on the other.
3. Mass m0 is ﬁxed in space.
Assumption (1) is excellent for bodies which are distant from the central attracting body, which is the case for most heavenly bodies. A significant class of problems for which assumption (1) is poor is that of
artificial satellites in the very near vicinity of oblate planets. As a
comment on assumption (2), we note that aerodynamic drag on a lowaltitude earth satellite is a force which usually cannot be ignored in
the orbital analysis. For an artificial satellite in earth orbit, the error
of assumption (3) is negligible because the ratio of the mass of the
satellite to that of the earth is very small. On the other hand, for the
earth–moon system, a small but significant error is introduced if assumption (3) is invoked—note that the lunar mass is about 1/81 times
that of the earth.

Article 3/13

Perturbed Two-Body Problem
We now account for the motion of both masses and allow the presence of other forces in addition to those of mutual attraction by considering the perturbed two-body problem. Figure 3/24 depicts the major
mass m0, the minor mass m, their respective position vectors r1 and r2
measured relative to an inertial frame, the gravitation forces F and ϪF,
and a non-two-body force P which is exerted on mass m. The force P
may be due to aerodynamic drag, solar pressure, the presence of a third
body, on-board thrusting activities, a nonspherical gravitational ﬁeld, or
a combination of these and other sources.
Application of Newton’s second law to each mass results in
G

mm0
r3

r ϭ m0¨1
r

ϪG

and

mm0
r3

(m0 ϩ m)
r3

rϩ

(m0 ϩ m)
r3

rϭ

P
m

(3/49)

Equation 3/49 is a second-order differential equation which, when
solved, yields the relative position vector r as a function of time. Numerical techniques are usually required for the integration of the scalar differential equations which are equivalent to the vector equation 3/49,
especially if P is nonzero.

Restricted Two-Body Problem
If m0 ϾϾ m and P ϭ 0, we have the restricted two-body problem,
the equation of motion of which is
r
¨ϩG

m0
r3

rϭ0

(3/49a)

With r and ¨ expressed in polar coordinates, Eq. 3/49a becomes
r

˙
¨
(r Ϫ r ␪ 2)er ϩ (r ␪ ϩ 2r ␪ )e␪ ϩ G
¨
˙˙

m0
r3

(rer) ϭ 0

When we equate coefﬁcients of like unit vectors, we recover Eqs. 3/37.
Comparison of Eq. 3/49 (with P ϭ 0) and Eq. 3/49a enables us to
relax the assumption that mass m0 is ﬁxed in space. If we replace m0 by
(m0 ϩ m) in the expressions derived with the assumption of m0 ﬁxed,
then we obtain expressions which account for the motion of m0. For example, the corrected expression for the period of elliptical motion of m
about m0 is, from Eq. 3/44,
␶ ϭ 2␲

a3/2
ΊG(m0 ϩ m)

where the equality R2g ϭ Gm0 has been used.

–F
r

r1

P
m

Figure 3/24

or
r
¨ϩG

m0

r ϩ P ϭ mr 2
¨

P
ϭ ¨2 Ϫ ¨1 ϭ ¨
r
r
r
m

(3/49b)

235

mm0
F = G ——– r
r3

r2

Dividing the ﬁrst equation by m0, the second equation by m, and subtracting the ﬁrst equation from the second give
ϪG

Central-Force Motion

P

236

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

SAMPLE PROBLEM 3/31
An artiﬁcial satellite is launched from point B on the equator by its carrier
rocket and inserted into an elliptical orbit with a perigee altitude of 2000 km. If
the apogee altitude is to be 4000 km, compute (a) the necessary perigee velocity
vP and the corresponding apogee velocity vA, (b) the velocity at point C where the
altitude of the satellite is 2500 km, and (c) the period ␶ for a complete orbit.

C
2500 km
vP

R
θ
O

A

P
B

vA

Solution. (a) The perigee and apogee velocities for speciﬁed altitudes are given
by Eqs. 3/48, where
4000
km

rmax ϭ 6371 ϩ 4000 ϭ 10 371 km

ᕡ

2000 km
12 742 km
2a

rmin ϭ 6371 ϩ 2000 ϭ 8371 km
a ϭ (rmin ϩ rmax )/2 ϭ 9371 km
Helpful Hints

Thus,
g

rmax

Ίa Ί r

vP ϭ R

ϭ 6371(103)

min

Ί

9.825
9371(103)

ϭ 7261 m/s
g

rmin

Ίa Ίr

vA ϭ R

ϭ 6371(103)

max

or

Ί

ᕡ The mean radius of 12 742/2 ϭ 6371

10 371
8371

26 140 km/h

Ans.

km from Table D/2 in Appendix D is
used. Also the absolute acceleration
due to gravity g ϭ 9.825 m/s2 from
Art. 1/5 will be used.

8371
9.825
Ί9371(10 ) Ί10 371
3

ϭ 5861 m/s

or

21 099 km/h

Ans.

(b) For an altitude of 2500 km the radial distance from the center of the earth is
r ϭ 6371 ϩ 2500 ϭ 8871 km. From Eq. 3/47 the velocity at point C becomes

ᕢ

vC2 ϭ 2gR2

1
1
1
΂1 Ϫ 2a΃ ϭ 2(9.825)[(6371)(10 )] ΂8871 Ϫ 18 1742΃10
r
3

2

3

ᕢ We must be careful with units. It is

ϭ 47.353(106)(m/s)2
vC ϭ 6881 m/s

or

24 773 km/h

Ans.

often safer to work in base units,
meters in this case, and convert
later.

(c) The period of the orbit is given by Eq. 3/44, which becomes

ᕣ

␶ ϭ 2␲

a3/2
RΊg

ϭ 2␲

[(9371)(103)]

3/2

(6371)(103)Ί9.825
or

ᕣ We should observe here that the

ϭ 9026 s

␶ ϭ 2.507 h

Ans.

time interval between successive
overhead transits of the satellite as
recorded by an observer on the
equator is longer than the period
calculated here since the observer
will have moved in space due to the
counterclockwise rotation of the
earth, as seen looking down on the
north pole.

Article 3/13

PROBLEMS
(Unless otherwise indicated, the velocities mentioned in
the problems which follow are measured from a nonrotating reference frame moving with the center of the attracting body. Also, aerodynamic drag is to be neglected unless
stated otherwise. Use g ϭ 9.825 m/s2 (32.23 ft/sec2) for the
absolute gravitational acceleration at the surface of the
earth and treat the earth as a sphere of radius R ϭ 6371 km
(3959 mi).)

Introductory Problems
3/267 Determine the speed v of the earth in its orbit
about the sun. Assume a circular orbit of radius
93(106) miles.
3/268 What velocity v must the space shuttle have in
order to release the Hubble space telescope in a circular earth orbit 590 km above the surface of the
earth?

Problems

237

3/270 A spacecraft is orbiting the earth in a circular orbit
of altitude H. If its rocket engine is activated to
produce a sudden burst of speed, determine the increase ⌬v necessary to allow the spacecraft to escape from the earth’s gravity ﬁeld. Calculate ⌬v if
H ϭ 200 mi.
3/271 Determine the apparent velocity vrel of a satellite
moving in a circular equatorial orbit 200 mi above
the earth as measured by an observer on the equator (a) for a west-to-east orbit and (b) for an eastto-west orbit. Why is the west-to-east orbit more
easily achieved?
3/272 A spacecraft is in an initial circular orbit with an
altitude of 350 km. As it passes point P, onboard
thrusters give it a velocity boost of 25 m/s. Determine the resulting altitude gain ⌬h at point A.

A

P

590 km

Δh

350 km
Problem 3/272

3/273 If the perigee altitude of an earth satellite is 240
km and the apogee altitude is 400 km, compute the
eccentricity e of the orbit and the period ␶ of one
complete orbit in space.

Problem 3/268

3/269 Show that the path of the moon is concave toward
the sun at the position shown. Assume that the
sun, earth, and moon are in the same line.

Sunlight
Earth
Moon

Problem 3/269

3/274 In one of the orbits of the Apollo spacecraft about
the moon, its distance from the lunar surface varied from 60 mi to 180 mi. Compute the maximum
velocity of the spacecraft in this orbit.

238

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

3/275 A satellite is in a circular earth orbit of radius 2R,
where R is the radius of the earth. What is the
minimum velocity boost ⌬v necessary to reach
point B, which is a distance 3R from the center of
the earth? At what point in the original circular
orbit should the velocity increment be added?

3/277 Determine the speed v required of an earth satellite
at point A for (a) a circular orbit, (b) an elliptical
orbit of eccentricity e ϭ 0.1, (c) an elliptical orbit of
eccentricity e ϭ 0.9, and (d) a parabolic orbit. In
cases (b), (c), and (d), A is the orbit perigee.
v

B
A

3R
2R

0.1R

R

R

Problem 3/277

Representative Problems

Problem 3/275

3/276 The Mars orbiter for the Viking mission was designed to make one complete trip around the
planet in exactly the same time that it takes Mars
to revolve once about its own axis. This time is 24 h,
37 min, 23 s. In this way, it is possible for the orbiter to pass over the landing site of the lander
capsule at the same time in each Martian day at
the orbiter’s minimum (periapsis) altitude. For the
Viking I mission, the periapsis altitude of the orbiter was 1508 km. Make use of the data in Table
D/2 in Appendix D and compute the maximum
(apoapsis) altitude ha for the orbiter in its elliptical
path.

3/278 Initially in the 240-km circular orbit, the spacecraft S receives a velocity boost at P which will
take it to r l ȍ with no speed at that point. Determine the required velocity increment ⌬v at point P
and also determine the speed when r ϭ 2rP. At
what value of ␪ does r become 2rP?

S
r

θ

O

hp = 1508 km

ha

240 km
Problem 3/278
Problem 3/276

P

Article 3/13
3/279 Satellite A moving in the circular orbit and satellite B moving in the elliptical orbit collide and become entangled at point C. If the masses of the
satellites are equal, determine the maximum altitude hmax of the resulting orbit.
B
A

Problems

239

3/282 After launch from the earth, the 85 000-kg spaceshuttle orbiter is in the elliptical orbit shown. If
the orbit is to be circularized at the apogee altitude
of 320 km, determine the necessary time duration
⌬t during which its two orbital-maneuveringsystem (OMS) engines, each of which has a thrust
of 30 kN, must be ﬁred when the apogee position C
is reached.

C
B

C

240 km
800 mi

800 mi

200 mi

Problem 3/279

3/280 If the earth were suddenly deprived of its orbital
velocity around the sun, ﬁnd the time t which it
would take for the earth to “fall” to the location of
the center of the sun. (Hint: The time would be
one-half the period of a degenerate elliptical orbit
around the sun with the semiminor axis approaching zero.) Refer to Table D/2 for the exact period of
the earth around the sun.
3/281 Just after launch from the earth, the space-shuttle
orbiter is in the 37 ϫ 137-mi orbit shown. The ﬁrst
time that the orbiter passes the apogee A, its two
orbital-maneuvering-system (OMS) engines are
ﬁred to circularize the orbit. If the weight of the
orbiter is 175,000 lb and the OMS engines have a
thrust of 6000 lb each, determine the required
time duration ⌬t of the burn.

320 km
Problem 3/282

3/283 Just before separation of the lunar module, the
Apollo 17 command module was in the lunar orbit
shown in the ﬁgure. Determine the spacecraft
speeds at points P and A, which are called perilune
and apolune, respectively. Later in the mission,
with the lunar module on the surface of the moon,
the orbit of the command module was to be circularized. Determine the speed increment ⌬v required if circularization is to be performed at A.

P

A

109 km
28 km
P

A

O

137 mi
37 mi
Problem 3/281

Problem 3/283

240

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

3/284 Determine the required velocity vB in the direction
indicated so that the spacecraft path will be tangent to the circular orbit at point C. What must be
the distance b so that this path is possible?

3/286 Determine the angle ␤ made by the velocity vector
v with respect to the ␪-direction for an earth satellite traveling in an elliptical orbit of eccentricity e.
Express ␤ in terms of the angle ␪ measured from
perigee.

C
θ

4000 mi

v
m

β

3959 mi

r

θ

Perigee
16,000 mi
vB
B
b
Problem 3/284

3/285 An earth satellite A is in a circular west-to-east
equatorial orbit a distance 300 km above the surface of the earth as indicated. An observer B on the
equator who sees the satellite directly overhead
will see it directly overhead in the next orbit at position BЈ because of the rotation of the earth. The
radial line to the satellite will have rotated
through the angle 2␲ ϩ ␪, and the observer will
measure the apparent period ␶Ј as a value slightly
greater than the true period ␶. Calculate ␶Ј and
␶Ј Ϫ ␶.

Problem 3/286

3/287 Two satellites B and C are in the same circular
orbit of altitude 500 miles. Satellite B is 1000 mi
ahead of satellite C as indicated. Show that C can
catch up to B by “putting on the brakes.” Speciﬁcally, by what amount ⌬v should the circular-orbit
velocity of C be reduced so that it will rendezvous
with B after one period in its new elliptical orbit?
Check to see that C does not strike the earth in the
elliptical orbit.

10

ω

i
00 m

C

B
N

O
B

θ Equator

R

B′
A

A′

500 mi
Problem 3/287

Problem 3/285

3/288 Determine the necessary amount ⌬v by which the
circular-orbit velocity of satellite C should be reduced if the catch-up maneuver of Prob. 3/287 is to
be accomplished with not one but two periods in a
new elliptical orbit.

Article 3/13
3/289 The spacecraft S is to be injected into a circular
orbit of altitude 400 km. Because of equipment
malfunction, the injection speed v is correct for the
circular orbit, but the initial velocity v makes an
angle ␣ with the intended direction. What is the
maximum permissible error ␣ in order that the
spacecraft not strike the earth? Neglect atmospheric resistance.
α

v

Problems

241

3/292 A satellite is placed in a circular polar orbit a distance H above the earth. As the satellite goes over
the north pole at A, its retro-rocket is activated to
produce a burst of negative thrust which reduces
its velocity to a value which will ensure an equatorial landing. Derive the expression for the required
reduction ⌬vA of velocity at A. Note that A is the
apogee of the elliptical path.
A

S

N

B
R
400 km
S

H

Problem 3/289

3/290 The 175,000-lb space-shuttle orbiter is in a circular orbit of altitude 200 miles. The two orbitalmaneuvering-system (OMS) engines, each of which
has a thrust of 6000 lb, are ﬁred in retrothrust for
150 seconds. Determine the angle ␤ which locates
the intersection of the shuttle trajectory with the
earth’s surface. Assume that the shuttle position B
corresponds to the completion of the OMS burn
and that no loss of altitude occurs during the burn.
B

Problem 3/292

3/293 A spacecraft moving in a west-to-east equatorial
orbit is observed by a tracking station located on
the equator. If the spacecraft has a perigee altitude
H ϭ 150 km and velocity v when directly over the
station and an apogee altitude of 1500 km, determine
an expression for the angular rate p (relative to
the earth) at which the antenna dish must be rotated when the spacecraft is directly overhead.
Compute p. The angular velocity of the earth is
␻ ϭ 0.7292(10Ϫ4) rad/s.

200 mi
β

C

v

East
ω

R

p

N

Problem 3/290

H

West

3/291 Compare the orbital period of the moon calculated
with the assumption of a ﬁxed earth with the period calculated without this assumption.
Problem 3/293

242

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

3/294 Sometime after launch from the earth, a spacecraft
S is in the orbital path of the earth at some distance from the earth at position P. What velocity
boost ⌬v at P is required so that the spacecraft arrives at the orbit of Mars at A as shown?

S

* 3/296 In 1995 a spacecraft called the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) was placed into a circular orbit about the sun and inside that of the
earth as shown. Determine the distance h so that
the period of the spacecraft orbit will match that of
the earth, with the result that the spacecraft will
remain between the earth and the sun in a “halo”
orbit.

Sun
A

P

Earth

Earth

S

Mars
Sun

Problem 3/294

3/295 A spacecraft with a mass of 800 kg is traveling in a
circular orbit 6000 km above the earth. It is desired to change the orbit to an elliptical one with a
perigee altitude of 3000 km as shown. The transition is made by ﬁring the retro-engine at A with a
reverse thrust of 2000 N. Calculate the required
time t for the engine to be activated.

6000
A
km

3000
km

Problem 3/295

Problem 3/296

h

Article 3/13
᭤3/297 A space vehicle moving in a circular orbit of radius
r1 transfers to a larger circular orbit of radius r2 by
means of an elliptical path between A and B. (This
transfer path is known as the Hohmann transfer
ellipse.) The transfer is accomplished by a burst of
speed ⌬vA at A and a second burst of speed ⌬vB at
B. Write expressions for ⌬vA and ⌬vB in terms of
the radii shown and the value of g of the acceleration due to gravity at the earth’s surface. If each
⌬v is positive, how can the velocity for path 2 be
less than the velocity for path 1? Compute each ⌬v
if r1 ϭ (6371 ϩ 500) km and r2 ϭ (6371 ϩ 35 800)
km. Note that r2 has been chosen as the radius of a
geosynchronous orbit.

Problems

᭤3/298 At the instant represented in the ﬁgure, a small
experimental satellite A is ejected from the shuttle
orbiter with a velocity vr ϭ 100 m/s relative to the
shuttle, directed toward the center of the earth.
The shuttle is in a circular orbit of altitude h ϭ 200
km. For the resulting elliptical orbit of the satellite,
determine the semimajor axis a and its orientation,
the period ␶, eccentricity e, apogee speed va, perigee
speed vp, rmax, and rmin. Sketch the satellite orbit.
A
h

vr

y
x

Problem 3/298
B

A
r1

r2
1
2

Problem 3/297

243

244

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

3/14

Relative Motion

Up to this point in our development of the kinetics of particle motion, we have applied Newton’s second law and the equations of workenergy and impulse-momentum to problems where all measurements of
motion were made with respect to a reference system which was considered ﬁxed. The nearest we can come to a “ﬁxed” reference system is the
primary inertial system or astronomical frame of reference, which is an
imaginary set of axes attached to the ﬁxed stars. All other reference systems then are considered to have motion in space, including any reference system attached to the moving earth.
The acceleration of points attached to the earth as measured in the
primary system are quite small, however, and we normally neglect them
for most earth-surface measurements. For example, the acceleration of
the center of the earth in its near-circular orbit around the sun considered ﬁxed is 0.00593 m/s2 (or 0.01946 ft/sec2), and the acceleration of a
point on the equator at sea level with respect to the center of the earth
considered ﬁxed is 0.0339 m/s2 (or 0.1113 ft/sec2). Clearly, these accelerations are small compared with g and with most other signiﬁcant accelerations in engineering work. Thus, we make only a small error when
we assume that our earth-attached reference axes are equivalent to a
ﬁxed reference system.

z

Z

Relative-Motion Equation
We now consider a particle A of mass m, Fig. 3/25, whose motion is
observed from a set of axes x-y-z which translate with respect to a ﬁxed
reference frame X-Y-Z. Thus, the x-y-z directions always remain parallel
to the X-Y-Z directions. We postpone discussion of motion relative to a
rotating reference system until Arts. 5/7 and 7/7. The acceleration of the
origin B of x-y-z is aB. The acceleration of A as observed from or relative
r
to x-y-z is arel ϭ aA/B ϭ ¨A/B, and by the relative-motion principle of Art.
2/8, the absolute acceleration of A is

ΣF
m
A

rA

rA/B = rrel
y

Y
rB

O

B

aA ϭ aB ϩ arel

x

X

Thus, Newton’s second law ΣF ϭ maA becomes

Figure 3/25

ΣF ϭ m(aB ϩ arel)
Y

y

Y

a

a
– ma
m
ΣF

x

m

X

ΣF

(a)

X
(b)

Figure 3/26

(3/50)

We can identify the force sum ΣF, as always, by a complete free-body
diagram. This diagram will appear the same to an observer in x-y-z or to
one in X-Y-Z as long as only the real forces acting on the particle are represented. We can conclude immediately that Newton’s second law does
not hold with respect to an accelerating system since ΣF marel.

D’Alembert’s Principle
The particle acceleration we measure from a ﬁxed set of axes X-Y-Z,
Fig. 3/26a, is its absolute acceleration a. In this case the familiar relation ΣF ϭ ma applies. When we observe the particle from a moving

Article 3/14

system x-y-z attached to the particle, Fig. 3/26b, the particle necessarily appears to be at rest or in equilibrium in x-y-z. Thus, the observer
who is accelerating with x-y-z concludes that a force Ϫma acts on the
particle to balance ΣF. This point of view, which allows the treatment
of a dynamics problem by the methods of statics, was an outgrowth of
the work of D’Alembert contained in his Traité de Dynamique published in 1743.
This approach merely amounts to rewriting the equation of motion
as ΣF Ϫ ma ϭ 0, which assumes the form of a zero force summation if
Ϫma is treated as a force. This ﬁctitious force is known as the inertia
force, and the artiﬁcial state of equilibrium created is known as dynamic
equilibrium. The apparent transformation of a problem in dynamics to
one in statics has become known as D’Alembert’s principle.
Opinion differs concerning the original interpretation of D’Alembert’s principle, but the principle in the form in which it is generally
known is regarded in this book as being mainly of historical interest. It
evolved when understanding and experience with dynamics were extremely limited and was a means of explaining dynamics in terms of the
principles of statics, which were more fully understood. This excuse for
using an artiﬁcial situation to describe a real one is no longer justiﬁed,
as today a wealth of knowledge and experience with dynamics strongly
supports the direct approach of thinking in terms of dynamics rather
than statics. It is somewhat difﬁcult to understand the long persistence
in the acceptance of statics as a way of understanding dynamics, particularly in view of the continued search for the understanding and description of physical phenomena in their most direct form.
We cite only one simple example of the method known as D’Alembert’s principle. The conical pendulum of mass m, Fig. 3/27a, is swinging
in a horizontal circle, with its radial line r having an angular velocity ␻. In
the straightforward application of the equation of motion ΣF ϭ man in
the direction n of the acceleration, the free-body diagram in part b of the
ﬁgure shows that T sin ␪ ϭ mr␻2. When we apply the equilibrium requirement in the y-direction, T cos ␪ Ϫ mg ϭ 0, we can ﬁnd the unknowns T
and ␪. But if the reference axes are attached to the particle, the particle
will appear to be in equilibrium relative to these axes. Accordingly, the inertia force Ϫma must be added, which amounts to visualizing the application of mr␻2 in the direction opposite to the acceleration, as shown in part
c of the ﬁgure. With this pseudo free-body diagram, a zero force summation in the n-direction gives T sin ␪ Ϫ mr␻2 ϭ 0 which, of course, gives us
the same result as before.
We may conclude that no advantage results from this alternative
formulation. The authors recommend against using it since it introduces no simpliﬁcation and adds a nonexistent force to the diagram. In
the case of a particle moving in a circular path, this hypothetical inertia
force is known as the centrifugal force since it is directed away from the
center and is opposite to the direction of the acceleration. You are
urged to recognize that there is no actual centrifugal force acting on
the particle. The only actual force which may properly be called centrifugal is the horizontal component of the tension T exerted by the
particle on the cord.

Relative Motion

245

θ
l
h
r

ω
(a)

y

y

T

T

θ
n

θ
mrω 2

n

mg

mg

(b)

(c)

Figure 3/27

246

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

Constant-Velocity, Nonrotating Systems
In discussing particle motion relative to moving reference systems,
we should note the special case where the reference system has a constant velocity and no rotation. If the x-y-z axes of Fig. 3/25 have a constant velocity, then aB ϭ 0 and the acceleration of the particle is aA ϭ
arel. Therefore, we may write Eq. 3/50 as
ΣF ϭ marel

ΣF
Path relative
to x-y-z

Z

m dr
rel

z

aA = arel
rrel
y

Y
O

B
X

x

vrel

(3/51)

which tells us that Newton’s second law holds for measurements made
in a system moving with a constant velocity. Such a system is known as
an inertial system or as a Newtonian frame of reference. Observers in
the moving system and in the ﬁxed system will also agree on the designation of the resultant force acting on the particle from their identical
free-body diagrams, provided they avoid the use of any so-called “inertia
forces.”
We will now examine the parallel question concerning the validity of
the work-energy equation and the impulse-momentum equation relative to
a constant-velocity, nonrotating system. Again, we take the x-y-z axes of
r
Fig. 3/25 to be moving with a constant velocity vB ϭ ˙B relative to the ﬁxed
axes X-Y-Z. The path of the particle A relative to x-y-z is governed by rrel
and is represented schematically in Fig. 3/28. The work done by ΣF relative to x-y-z is dUrel ϭ ΣF ⅐ drrel. But ΣF ϭ maA ϭ marel since aB ϭ 0. Also
arel ⅐ drrel ϭ vrel ⅐ dvrel for the same reason that at ds ϭ v dv in Art. 2/5 on
curvilinear motion. Thus, we have
dUrel ϭ marel ⅐ drrel ϭ mvrel dvrel ϭ d(1 mvrel2)
2
1
We deﬁne the kinetic energy relative to x-y-z as Trel ϭ 2 mvrel2 so
that we now have

dUrel ϭ dTrel

or

Urel ϭ ⌬Trel

(3/52)

Figure 3/28
which shows that the work-energy equation holds for measurements
made relative to a constant-velocity, nonrotating system.
Relative to x-y-z, the impulse on the particle during time dt is
ΣF dt ϭ maA dt ϭ marel dt. But marel dt ϭ m dvrel ϭ d(mvrel) so
ΣF dt ϭ d(mvrel)
We deﬁne the linear momentum of the particle relative to x-y-z as Grel ϭ
mvrel, which gives us ΣF dt ϭ dGrel. Dividing by dt and integrating give

˙
ΣF ϭ Grel

and

͵ ΣF dt ϭ ⌬G

rel

(3/53)

Thus, the impulse-momentum equations for a ﬁxed reference system
also hold for measurements made relative to a constant-velocity, nonrotating system.
Finally, we define the relative angular momentum of the particle about a point in x-y-z, such as the origin B, as the moment of the

Article 3/14

relative linear momentum. Thus, (HB)rel ϭ rrel ؋ Grel. The time derivative
˙
˙
gives (HB)rel ϭ ˙rel ؋ Grel ϩ rrel ؋ Grel. The ﬁrst term is nothing more
r
than vrel ؋ mvrel ϭ 0, and the second term becomes rrel ؋ ΣF ϭ ΣMB, the
sum of the moments about B of all forces on m. Thus, we have

˙
ΣMB ϭ (HB)rel

(3/54)

which shows that the moment-angular momentum relation holds with
respect to a constant-velocity, nonrotating system.
Although the work-energy and impulse-momentum equations hold
relative to a system translating with a constant velocity, the individual
expressions for work, kinetic energy, and momentum differ between the
ﬁxed and the moving systems. Thus,
(dU ϭ ΣF ⅐ drA)
1
(T ϭ 2 mvA2)

(G ϭ mvA)

(dUrel ϭ ΣF ⅐ drrel)
(Trel ϭ 1 mvrel2)
2
(Grel ϭ mvrel)

Giovanni Colla/StocktrekImages, Inc.

Equations 3/51 through 3/54 are formal proof of the validity of the
Newtonian equations of kinetics in any constant-velocity, nonrotating
system. We might have surmised these conclusions from the fact that
ΣF ϭ ma depends on acceleration and not velocity. We are also ready to
conclude that there is no experiment which can be conducted in and relative to a constant-velocity, nonrotating system (Newtonian frame of
reference) which discloses its absolute velocity. Any mechanical experiment will achieve the same results in any Newtonian system.

Relative motion is a critical issue during aircraft-carrier landings.

Relative Motion

247

248

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

SAMPLE PROBLEM 3/32

O

θ
r

A simple pendulum of mass m and length r is mounted on the ﬂatcar, which
has a constant horizontal acceleration a0 as shown. If the pendulum is released
from rest relative to the ﬂatcar at the position ␪ ϭ 0, determine the expression
for the tension T in the supporting light rod for any value of ␪. Also ﬁnd T for
␪ ϭ ␲/2 and ␪ ϭ ␲.

Solution. We attach our moving x-y coordinate system to the translating car
with origin at O for convenience. Relative to this system, n- and t-coordinates are
the natural ones to use since the motion is circular within x-y. The acceleration
of m is given by the relative-acceleration equation

˙
Integrating to obtain ␪ as a function of ␪ yields

0

˙ ˙
␪ d␪ ϭ

͵

␪

0

x

θ

·
rθ 2

T
a0

t

mg

··
rθ

Free-body
diagram

Acceleration
components

Helpful Hints
the n-direction equation, which con˙
tains the unknown T, will involve ␪ 2,
which, in turn, is obtained from an
¨
integration of ␪ .

¨
r ␪ ϭ g cos ␪ ϩ a0 sin ␪

˙
␪

n

ᕡ We choose the t-direction ﬁrst since

¨
mg cos ␪ ϭ m(r ␪ Ϫ a0 sin ␪)

͵

O

y

where arel is the acceleration which would be measured by an observer riding
˙
with the car. He would measure an n-component equal to r ␪ 2 and a t-component
¨
equal to r ␪ . The three components of the absolute acceleration of m are shown
in the separate view.
First, we apply Newton’s second law to the t-direction and get

˙ ˙ ¨
[ ␪ d ␪ ϭ ␪ d␪]

a0

θ

a ϭ a0 ϩ arel

ᕡ [ΣFt ϭ mat]

m

1
( g cos ␪ ϩ a0 sin ␪) d␪
r

˙
␪2 1
ϭ [g sin ␪ ϩ a0(1 Ϫ cos ␪)]
r
2
We now apply Newton’s second law to the n-direction, noting that the
˙
n-component of the absolute acceleration is r ␪ 2 Ϫ a0 cos ␪.

ᕢ [ΣFn ϭ man]

˙ ˙
ᕢ Be sure to recognize that ␪ d ␪ ϭ
¨
␪ d␪ may be obtained from v dv ϭ

˙
T Ϫ mg sin ␪ ϭ m(r ␪ 2 Ϫ a0 cos ␪)
ϭ m[2g sin ␪ ϩ 2a0(1 Ϫ cos ␪) Ϫ a0 cos ␪]
T ϭ m[3g sin ␪ ϩ a0(2 Ϫ 3 cos ␪)]

at ds by dividing by r2.

Ans.

For ␪ ϭ ␲/2 and ␪ ϭ ␲, we have
T␲/2 ϭ m[3g(1) ϩ a0(2 Ϫ 0)] ϭ m(3g ϩ 2a0)

Ans.

T␲ ϭ m[3g(0) ϩ a0(2 Ϫ 3[Ϫ1])] ϭ 5ma0

Ans.

Article 3/14

SAMPLE PROBLEM 3/33

Relative Motion

249

X

The ﬂatcar moves with a constant speed v0 and carries a winch which produces a constant tension P in the cable attached to the small carriage. The carriage has a mass m and rolls freely on the horizontal surface starting from rest
relative to the ﬂatcar at x ϭ 0, at which instant X ϭ x0 ϭ b. Apply the workenergy equation to the carriage, ﬁrst, as an observer moving with the frame of
reference of the car and, second, as an observer on the ground. Show the compatibility of the two expressions.

x0

x

P

m

v0

x=0
b

Solution.

To the observer on the ﬂatcar, the work done by P is

ᕡ

Urel ϭ

͵

X
x

0

P dx ϭ Px

for constant P

x0

x

The change in kinetic energy relative to the car is
⌬Trel ϭ 1 m(x 2 Ϫ 0)
˙
2
The work-energy equation for the moving observer becomes
[Urel ϭ ⌬Trel]

1

Px ϭ 2 mx 2
˙

Helpful Hints

ᕡ The only coordinate which the moving observer can measure is x.

To the observer on the ground, the work done by P is
Uϭ

͵

X

b

P dX ϭ P(X Ϫ b)

The change in kinetic energy for the ground measurement is

ᕢ

ᕢ To the ground observer, the initial

˙
⌬T ϭ 1 m(X2 Ϫ v02)
2

velocity of the carriage is v0, so its
1
initial kinetic energy is 2 mv02.

The work-energy equation for the ﬁxed observer gives
[U ϭ ⌬T]

1

˙
P(X Ϫ b) ϭ 2 m(X2 Ϫ v02)

To reconcile this equation with that for the moving observer, we can make
the following substitutions:
X ϭ x0 ϩ x,

˙
X ϭ v 0 ϩ ˙,
x

¨ x
Xϭ¨

Thus,
P(X Ϫ b) ϭ Px ϩ P(x0 Ϫ b) ϭ Px ϩ mx (x0 Ϫ b)
¨

ᕣ

ϭ Px ϩ mx v0t ϭ Px ϩ mv0˙
x
¨
and

˙
X 2 Ϫ v02 ϭ (v02 ϩ ˙2 ϩ 2v0˙ Ϫ v02) ϭ ˙2 ϩ 2v0˙
x
x
x
x
The work-energy equation for the ﬁxed observer now becomes
Px ϩ mv0˙ ϭ 1 mx 2 ϩ mv0˙
x 2 ˙
x
which is merely Px ϭ 1 mx 2, as concluded by the moving observer. We see, there2 ˙
fore, that the difference between the two work-energy expressions is
U Ϫ Urel ϭ T Ϫ Trel ϭ mv0˙
x

ᕣ The symbol t stands for the time of
motion from x ϭ 0 to x ϭ x. The
displacement x0 Ϫ b of the carriage
is its velocity v0 times the time t or
x0 Ϫ b ϭ v0t. Also, since the constant
acceleration times the time equals
the velocity change, ¨t ϭ ˙.
x
x

250

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

PROBLEMS
Introductory Problems
3/299 If the spring of constant k is compressed a distance
␦ as indicated, calculate the acceleration arel of the
block of mass m1 relative to the frame of mass m2
upon release of the spring. The system is initially
stationary.
m2

3/301 The cart with attached x-y axes moves with an absolute speed v ϭ 2 m/s to the right. Simultaneously,
the light arm of length l ϭ 0.5 m rotates about
˙
point B of the cart with angular velocity ␪ ϭ 2
rad/s. The mass of the sphere is m ϭ 3 kg. Determine the following quantities for the sphere when
␪ ϭ 0: G, Grel, T, Trel, HO, (HB)rel where the subscript “rel” indicates measurement relative to the
x-y axes. Point O is an inertially ﬁxed point coincident with point B at the instant under consideration.
y

k

δ

m1

m

θ

l
Problem 3/299

3/300 The ﬂatbed truck is traveling at the constant speed
of 60 km/h up the 15-percent grade when the 100kg crate which it carries is given a shove which imparts to it an initial relative velocity ˙ ϭ 3 m/s
x
toward the rear of the truck. If the crate slides a
distance x ϭ 2 m measured on the truck bed before
coming to rest on the bed, compute the coefﬁcient
of kinetic friction ␮k between the crate and the
truck bed.
60 k

x

O, B

m/h
x

v

Problem 3/301

3/302 The aircraft carrier is moving at a constant speed
and launches a jet plane with a mass of 3 Mg in a
distance of 75 m along the deck by means of a
steam-driven catapult. If the plane leaves the deck
with a velocity of 240 km/h relative to the carrier
and if the jet thrust is constant at 22 kN during
takeoff, compute the constant force P exerted by
the catapult on the airplane during the 75-m travel
of the launch carriage.

75 m
15
100

Problem 3/300

Problem 3/302

Article 3/14
3/303 The 4000-lb van is driven from position A to position B on the barge, which is towed at a constant
speed v0 ϭ 10 mi/hr. The van starts from rest relative to the barge at A, accelerates to v ϭ 15 mi/hr
relative to the barge over a distance of 80 ft, and
then stops with a deceleration of the same magnitude. Determine the magnitude of the net force F
between the tires of the van and the barge during
this maneuver.

A

80′
80′
v = 15 mi/hr

Problems

251

3.2 m

Problem 3/305

3/306 A boy of mass m is standing initially at rest relative
to the moving walkway, which has a constant horizontal speed u. He decides to accelerate his progress
and starts to walk from point A with a steadily increasing speed and reaches point B with a speed
x
˙ ϭ v relative to the walkway. During his acceleration he generates an average horizontal force F
between his shoes and the walkway. Write the
work-energy equations for his absolute and relative
motions and explain the meaning of the term muv.

B

v0 = 10 mi/hr

Problem 3/303

Representative Problems
s

3/304 The launch catapult of the aircraft carrier gives the
7-Mg jet airplane a constant acceleration and
launches the airplane in a distance of 100 m measured along the angled takeoff ramp. The carrier is
moving at a steady speed vC ϭ 16 m/s. If an absolute aircraft speed of 90 m/s is desired for takeoff,
determine the net force F supplied by the catapult
and the aircraft engines.

15°
vC

x
xA
A

B

Problem 3/306

3/307 The block of mass m is attached to the frame by the
spring of stiffness k and moves horizontally with
negligible friction within the frame. The frame and
block are initially at rest with x ϭ x0, the uncompressed length of the spring. If the frame is given a
constant acceleration a0, determine the maximum
x
velocity ˙max ϭ (vrel )max of the block relative to the
frame.
x

Problem 3/304

3/305 The coefﬁcients of friction between the ﬂatbed of
the truck and crate are ␮s ϭ 0.80 and ␮k ϭ 0.70.
The coefﬁcient of kinetic friction between the truck
tires and the road surface is 0.90. If the truck stops
from an initial speed of 15 m/s with maximum
braking (wheels skidding), determine where on the
bed the crate ﬁnally comes to rest or the velocity
vrel relative to the truck with which the crate
strikes the wall at the forward edge of the bed.

u

a0

m
k

Problem 3/307

252

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

3/308 The slider A has a mass of 2 kg and moves with
negligible friction in the 30Њ slot in the vertical sliding plate. What horizontal acceleration a0 should
be given to the plate so that the absolute acceleration of the slider will be vertically down? What is
the value of the corresponding force R exerted on
the slider by the slot?

3/310 Consider the system of Prob. 3/309 where the mass of
the ball is m ϭ 10 kg and the length of the light rod is
l ϭ 0.8 m. The ball–rod assembly is free to rotate
about a vertical axis through O. The carriage, rod,
and ball are initially at rest with ␪ ϭ 0 when the carriage is given a constant acceleration aO ϭ 3 m/s2.
Write an expression for the tension T in the rod as a
function of ␪ and calculate T for the position ␪ ϭ ␲/2.
3/311 A simple pendulum is placed on an elevator, which
accelerates upward as shown. If the pendulum is
displaced an amount ␪0 and released from rest relative to the elevator, ﬁnd the tension T0 in the supporting light rod when ␪ ϭ 0. Evaluate your result
for ␪0 ϭ ␲/2.

A
a0
30°

Problem 3/308
O

3/309 The ball A of mass 10 kg is attached to the light rod
of length l ϭ 0.8 m. The mass of the carriage alone
is 250 kg, and it moves with an acceleration aO as
˙
shown. If ␪ ϭ 3 rad/s when ␪ ϭ 90Њ, ﬁnd the kinetic
energy T of the system if the carriage has a velocity
of 0.8 m/s (a) in the direction of aO and (b) in the direction opposite to aO. Treat the ball as a particle.

l
A

θ

O

aO

Problem 3/309

θ

l
a0
m

Problem 3/311

3/312 A boy of mass m is standing initially at rest relative
to the moving walkway inclined at the angle ␪ and
moving with a constant speed u. He decides to accelerate his progress and starts to walk from point A
with a steadily increasing speed and reaches point B
with a speed vr relative to the walkway. During his
acceleration he generates a constant average force F
tangent to the walkway between his shoes and the
walkway surface. Write the work-energy equations
for the motion between A and B for his absolute motion and his relative motion and explain the meaning of the term muvr. If the boy weighs 150 lb and if
u ϭ 2 ft/sec, s ϭ 30 ft, and ␪ ϭ 10Њ, calculate the
power Prel developed by the boy as he reaches the
speed of 2.5 ft/sec relative to the walkway.
s
x

x0

B

u

A
θ

Problem 3/312

u

Article 3/14
᭤3/313 A ball is released from rest relative to the elevator
at a distance h1 above the ﬂoor. The speed of the elevator at the time of ball release is v0. Determine
the bounce height h2 of the ball (a) if v0 is constant
and (b) if an upward elevator acceleration a ϭ g/4
begins at the instant the ball is released. The coefﬁcient of restitution for the impact is e.

Problems

253

B

l

A
v

θ

C

Problem 3/314

g
a= –
4
h1

h2

v0

Problem 3/313

᭤3/314 The small slider A moves with negligible friction
down the tapered block, which moves to the right
with constant speed v ϭ v0. Use the principle of
work-energy to determine the magnitude vA of the
absolute velocity of the slider as it passes point C if
it is released at point B with no velocity relative to
the block. Apply the equation, both as an observer
ﬁxed to the block and as an observer ﬁxed to the
ground, and reconcile the two relations.

᭤3/315 When a particle is dropped from rest relative to the
surface of the earth at a latitude ␥, the initial apparent acceleration is the relative acceleration due
to gravity grel. The absolute acceleration due to
gravity g is directed toward the center of the earth.
Derive an expression for grel in terms of g, R, ␻,
and ␥, where R is the radius of the earth treated as
a sphere and ␻ is the constant angular velocity of
the earth about the polar axis considered ﬁxed. (Although axes x-y-z are attached to the earth and
hence rotate, we may use Eq. 3/50 as long as the
particle has no velocity relative to x-y-z). (Hint: Use
the ﬁrst two terms of the binomial expansion for
the approximation.)
ω

y

N

x
aB
g

θ
grel

γ

O

B

R

Problem 3/315

254

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

᭤3/316 The ﬁgure represents the space shuttle S, which is
(a) in a circular orbit about the earth and (b) in an
elliptical orbit where P is its perigee position. The
exploded views on the right represent the cabin
space with its x-axis oriented in the direction of the
orbit. The astronauts conduct an experiment by applying a known force F in the x-direction to a small
mass m. Explain why F ϭ mx does or does not hold
¨
in each case, where x is measured within the spacecraft. Assume that the shuttle is between perigee
and apogee in the elliptical orbit so that the orbital
speed is changing with time. Note that the t- and
x-axes are tangent to the path, and the ␪-axis is
normal to the radial r-direction.

θ, t

x
Circular
Orbit

t, θ

r
r

S

m

S
O

x

F

y

(a)
t
θ
Elliptical
Orbit

θ

x

t

r
r

S

S
O

m

y

P

F

(b)
Problem 3/316

x

Article 3/15

3/15

CHAPTER REVIEW

In Chapter 3 we have developed the three basic methods of solution to
problems in particle kinetics. This experience is central to the study of dynamics and lays the foundation for the subsequent study of rigid-body and
nonrigid-body dynamics. These three methods are summarized as follows:

1. Direct Application of Newton’s Second Law
First, we applied Newton’s second law ΣF ϭ ma to determine the
instantaneous relation between forces and the acceleration they produce. With the background of Chapter 2 for identifying the kind of motion and with the aid of our familiar free-body diagram to be certain
that all forces are accounted for, we were able to solve a large variety of
problems using x-y, n-t, and r-␪ coordinates for plane-motion problems
and x-y-z, r-␪-z, and R-␪-␾ coordinates for space problems.
2. Work-Energy Equations
Next, we integrated the basic equation of motion ΣF ϭ ma with respect to displacement and derived the scalar equations for work and energy. These equations enable us to relate the initial and ﬁnal velocities to
the work done during an interval by forces external to our deﬁned system.
We expanded this approach to include potential energy, both elastic and
gravitational. With these tools we discovered that the energy approach is
especially valuable for conservative systems, that is, systems wherein the
loss of energy due to friction or other forms of dissipation is negligible.
3. Impulse-Momentum Equations
Finally, we rewrote Newton’s second law in the form of force equals
time rate of change of linear momentum and moment equals time rate
of change of angular momentum. Then we integrated these relations
with respect to time and derived the impulse and momentum equations.
These equations were then applied to motion intervals where the forces
were functions of time. We also investigated the interactions between
particles under conditions where the linear momentum is conserved and
where the angular momentum is conserved.
In the ﬁnal section of Chapter 3, we employed these three basic
methods in speciﬁc application areas as follows:
1. We noted that the impulse-momentum method is convenient in developing the relations governing particle impacts.
2. We observed that the direct application of Newton’s second law enables us to determine the trajectory properties of a particle under
central-force attraction.
3. Finally, we saw that all three basic methods may be applied to particle motion relative to a translating frame of reference.
Successful solution of problems in particle kinetics depends on
knowledge of the prerequisite particle kinematics. Furthermore, the
principles of particle kinetics are required to analyze particle systems
and rigid bodies, which are covered in the remainder of Dynamics.

Chapter Review

255

256

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

REVIEW PROBLEMS
3/317 The 4-kg slider is released from rest in position A
and slides down the vertical-plane guide. If the
maximum compression of the spring is observed to
be 40 mm, determine the work Uƒ done by friction.

3/320 Collar A is free to slide with negligible friction on
the circular guide mounted in the vertical frame.
Determine the angle ␪ assumed by the collar if the
frame is given a constant horizontal acceleration a
to the right.

A

θ

r

a
0.6 m

A

4 kg

Problem 3/320
k = 20 kN/m
Problem 3/317

3/318 The crate is at rest at point A when it is nudged
down the incline. If the coefﬁcient of kinetic friction between the crate and the incline is 0.30 from
A to B and 0.22 from B to C, determine its speeds
at points B and C.
μ s = 0.40
μ k = 0.30

A

20°

7m

μ s = 0.28
μ k = 0.22

B

3/321 The position of the small 0.5-kg blocks in the
smooth radial slots in the disk which rotates about
a vertical axis at O is used to activate a speedcontrol mechanism. If each block moves from r ϭ
150 mm to r ϭ 175 mm while the speed of the disk
changes slowly from 300 rev/min to 400 rev/min,
design the spring by calculating the spring constant k of each spring. The springs are attached to
the inner ends of the slots and to the blocks.
ω =θ

C

10°
r

7m

k
k
Problem 3/318

r

O

3/319 An 88-kg sprinter starts from rest and reaches his
maximum speed of 11 m/s in 2.5 s with uniform acceleration. What is his power output when his
speed is 5 m/s? Comment on the conditions stated
in this problem.
Problem 3/321

Article 3/15
3/322 The simple 2-kg pendulum is released from rest in
the horizontal position. As it reaches the bottom
position, the cord wraps around the smooth ﬁxed
pin at B and continues in the smaller arc in the
vertical plane. Calculate the magnitude of the
force R supported by the pin at B when the pendulum passes the position ␪ ϭ 30Њ.

Review Problems

257

3/324 The spring of stiffness k is compressed and suddenly released, sending the particle of mass m sliding along the track. Determine the minimum
spring compression ␦ for which the particle will
not lose contact with the loop-the-loop track. The
sliding surface is smooth except for the rough portion of length s equal to R, where the coefﬁcient of
kinetic friction is µk.

800
mm

B

A
90°

R

400
mm

δ
k
B

m

θ

A

s=R
Rough area
μk
Problem 3/324

2 kg
Problem 3/322

3/323 For the elliptical orbit of a spacecraft around the
earth, determine the speed vA at point A which results in a perigee altitude at B of 200 km. What is
the eccentricity e of the orbit?
A
vA
600 km

3/325 The last two appearances of Comet Halley were in
1910 and 1986. The distance of its closest approach
to the sun averages about one-half of the distance
between the earth and the sun. Determine its maximum distance from the sun. Neglect the gravitational effects of the planets.
3/326 A small sphere of mass m is connected by a string
to a swivel at O and moves in a circle of radius r on
the smooth plane inclined at an angle ␪ with the
horizontal. If the sphere has a velocity u at the top
position A, determine the tension in the string as
the sphere passes the 90Њ position B and the bottom position C.
u
r

200 km

B

B
Problem 3/323

m

O
C

θ

Problem 3/326

A

258

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

3/327 The quarter-circular hollow tube of circular cross
section starts from rest at time t ϭ 0 and rotates
about point O in a horizontal plane with a con¨
stant counterclockwise angular acceleration ␪ ϭ 2
rad/s2. At what time t will the 0.5-kg particle P slip
relative to the tube? The coefﬁcient of static friction between the particle and the tube is µs ϭ 0.80.

3/329 A 3600-lb car is traveling with a speed of 60 mi/hr
as it approaches point A. Beginning at A, it decelerates uniformly to a speed of 25 mi/hr as it passes
point C of the horizontal and unbanked ramp.
Determine the total horizontal force F exerted by
the road on the car just after it passes point B.

0.75 m

60°

200′
P

C

··
θ
O

A

B

Problem 3/327

3/328 A person rolls a small ball with speed u along the
ﬂoor from point A. If x ϭ 3R, determine the required speed u so that the ball returns to A after
rolling on the circular surface in the vertical plane
from B to C and becoming a projectile at C. What
is the minimum value of x for which the game
could be played if contact must be maintained to
point C? Neglect friction.
C

R

300′
Problem 3/329

3/330 After release from rest at B, the 2-lb cylindrical
plug A slides down the smooth path and embeds itself in the 4-lb block C. Determine the velocity v of
the block and embedded plug immediately after
engagement and ﬁnd the maximum deﬂection x of
the spring. Neglect any friction under block C.
What fraction n of the original energy of the system is lost?
B

u
A

x
Problem 3/328

B

A
6′

C

Problem 3/330

k = 80 lb/ft

Article 3/15
3/331 The pickup truck is used to hoist the 40-kg bale of
hay as shown. If the truck has reached a constant
velocity v ϭ 5 m/s when x ϭ 12 m, compute the
corresponding tension T in the rope.

Review Problems

259

3/333 The frame of mass 6m is initially at rest. A particle
of mass m is attached to the end of the light rod,
which pivots freely at A. If the rod is released from
rest in the horizontal position shown, determine
the velocity vrel of the particle with respect to the
frame when the rod is vertical.
6m
l

A

m

16 m

v
Problem 3/333

x
Problem 3/331

3/332 A slider C has a speed of 3 m/s as it passes point A
of the guide, which lies in a horizontal plane. The
coefﬁcient of kinetic friction between the slider
and the guide is ␮k ϭ 0.60. Compute the tangential
deceleration at of the slider just after it passes
point A if (a) the slider hole and guide cross section
are both circular and (b) the slider hole and guide
cross section are both square. In case (b), the sides
of the square are vertical and horizontal. Assume a
slight clearance between the slider and the guide.
(a)

3/334 The object of the pinball-type game is to project the
particle so that it enters the hole at E. When
the spring is compressed and suddenly released,
the particle is projected along the track, which is
smooth except for the rough portion between
points B and C, where the coefﬁcient of kinetic
friction is ␮k. The particle becomes a projectile at
point D. Determine the correct spring compression
␦ so that the particle enters the hole at E. State
any necessary conditions relating the lengths d
and ␳.

(b)

0.6 m

A

C

Problem 3/332

ρ

A

d
D

ρ

k
m

ρ

ρ

δ

B

C

E

ρ
Rough area
μk

Hole

Problem 3/334

260

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

3/335 The 2-lb piece of putty is dropped 6 ft onto the
18-lb block initially at rest on the two springs, each
with a stiffness k ϭ 3 lb/in. Calculate the additional deﬂection ␦ of the springs due to the impact
of the putty, which adheres to the block upon
contact.

3/337 The 3-kg block A is released from rest in the 60Њ
position shown and subsequently strikes the 1-kg
cart B. If the coefﬁcient of restitution for the collision is e ϭ 0.7, determine the maximum displacement s of cart B beyond point C. Neglect friction.
0.6 m

2 lb

3 kg

30°

60°

1.8 m A

6′

C
B 1 kg

18 lb
k

δ
k

k = 3 lb/in.
Problem 3/335

3/336 A baseball pitcher delivers a fastball with a nearhorizontal velocity of 90 mi/hr. The batter hits a
home run over the center-ﬁeld fence. The 5-oz
ball travels a horizontal distance of 350 ft, with an
initial velocity in the 45Њ direction shown. Determine the magnitude Fav of the average force exerted by the bat on the ball during the 0.005
seconds of contact between the bat and the ball.
Neglect air resistance during the ﬂight of the ball.
y

v

45°

s

Problem 3/337

3/338 One of the functions of the space shuttle is to release communications satellites at low altitude. A
booster rocket is ﬁred at B, placing the satellite in
an elliptical transfer orbit, the apogee of which is at
the altitude necessary for a geosynchronous orbit.
(A geosynchronous orbit is an equatorial-plane circular orbit whose period is equal to the absolute rotational period of the earth. A satellite in such an
orbit appears to remain stationary to an earth-ﬁxed
observer.) A second booster rocket is then ﬁred at
C, and the ﬁnal circular orbit is achieved. On one of
the early space-shuttle missions, a 1500-lb satellite
was released from the shuttle at B, where h1 ϭ 170
miles. The booster rocket was to ﬁre for t ϭ 90 seconds, forming a transfer orbit with h2 ϭ 22,300
miles. The rocket failed during its burn. Radar observations determined the apogee altitude of the
transfer orbit to be only 700 miles. Determine the
actual time tЈ which the rocket motor operated before failure. Assume negligible mass change during
the booster rocket ﬁring.

x
90 mi/hr

Bat
B

C
Problem 3/336

h2 = 22,300 mi
h1 = 170 mi
Problem 3/338

Article 3/15
3/339 The system is released from rest while in the position shown. If m1 ϭ 0.5 kg, m2 ϭ 4 kg, d ϭ 0.5 m,
and ␪ ϭ 20Њ, determine the speeds of both bodies
just after the block leaves the incline (before striking the horizontal surface). Neglect all friction.

m1
m2

d

Review Problems

261

᭤3/341 Extensive wind-tunnel and coast-down studies of a
2000-lb automobile reveal the aerodynamic drag
force FD and the total nonaerodynamic rolling resistance force FR to vary with speed as shown in
the plot. Determine (a) the power P required for
steady speeds of 30 mi/hr and 60 mi/hr and (b) the
time t and the distance s required for the car to
coast down to a speed of 5 mi/hr from an initial
speed of 60 mi/hr. Assume a straight, level road
and no wind.

θ

60

᭤3/340 The retarding forces which act on the race car are
the drag force FD and a nonaerodynamic force FR.
The drag force is FD ϭ CD(1 ␳v2)S, where CD is the
2
drag coefﬁcient, ␳ is the air density, v is the car
2
speed, and S ϭ 30 ft is the projected frontal area of
the car. The nonaerodynamic force FR is constant at
200 lb. With its sheet metal in good condition, the
race car has a drag coefﬁcient CD ϭ 0.3 and it has a
corresponding top speed v ϭ 200 mi/hr. After a
minor collision, the damaged front-end sheet metal
causes the drag coefﬁcient to be CDЈ ϭ 0.4. What is
the corresponding top speed vЈ of the race car?

Force, lb

Problem 3/339
40
FR (linear)
FD (parabolic)

20

0
0

20

40

60

80

Speed v, mi/hr
Problem 3/341

᭤3/342 The hollow tube rotates with a constant angular
velocity ␻0 about a horizontal axis through end O.
At time t ϭ 0 the tube passes the vertical position
␪ ϭ 0, at which instant the small ball of mass m is
released with r essentially zero. Determine r as a
function of ␪.

Problem 3/340

O
r

θ

m

ω0

Problem 3/342

262

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

*Computer-Oriented Problems
* 3/343 The bowl-shaped device from Prob. 3/70 rotates
about a vertical axis with a constant angular velocity ␻ ϭ 6 rad/s. The value of r is 0.2 m. Determine
the range of the position angle ␪ for which a stationary value is possible if the coefﬁcient of static
friction between the particle and the surface is
␮s ϭ 0.20.
r
r

* 3/345 The system of Prob. 3/130 is repeated here. The
two 0.2-kg sliders are connected by a light rigid bar
of length L ϭ 0.5 m. If the system is released from
rest in the position shown with the spring unstretched, plot the speeds of A and B as functions
of the displacement of B (with zero being the initial position). The 0.14-MPa air pressure acting on
one 500-mm2 side of slider A is constant. The motion occurs in a vertical plane. Neglect friction.
State the maximum values of vA and vB and the
position of B at which each occurs.

μ s = 0.20
θ

ω

m

A
L
k = 1.2 kN/m
30°

60°

B
Problem 3/343

* 3/344 If the vertical frame starts from rest with a constant acceleration a and the smooth sliding collar
A is initially at rest in the bottom position ␪ ϭ 0,
˙
plot ␪ as a function of θ and ﬁnd the maximum position angle ␪max reached by the collar. Use the values a ϭ g/2 and r ϭ 0.3 m.

r

θ

Problem 3/345

* 3/346 The square plate is at rest in position A at time t ϭ 0
and subsequently translates in a vertical circle
according to ␪ ϭ kt2, where k ϭ 1 rad/s2, the displacement ␪ is in radians, and time t is in seconds.
A small 0.4-kg instrument P is temporarily ﬁxed to
the plate with adhesive. Plot the required shear
force F vs. time t for 0 Յ t Յ 5 s. If the adhesive
fails when the shear force F reaches 30 N, determine the time t and angular position ␪ when failure occurs.

a
A
r = 1.5 m
O
θ

Problem 3/344

P
A
Problem 3/346

Article 3/15
* 3/347 The system of Prob. 3/171 is repeated here. The
system is released from rest with ␪ ϭ 90Њ. Deter˙
mine and plot ␪ as a function of ␪. Determine the
˙
maximum magnitude of ␪ in the ensuing motion
and the value of ␪ at which it occurs. Also ﬁnd the
minimum value of ␪. Use the values m1 ϭ 1 kg, m2
ϭ 1.25 kg, and b ϭ 0.4 m. Neglect friction and the
mass of bar OB, and treat the body B as a particle.

Review Problems

263

* 3/349 A 20-lb sphere A is held at the 60Њ angle shown and
released. It strikes the 10-lb sphere B. The coefﬁcient of restitution for this collision is e ϭ 0.75.
Sphere B is attached to the end of a light rod that
pivots freely about point O. If the spring of constant k ϭ 100 lb/ft is initially unstretched, determine the maximum rotation angle ␪ of the light
rod after impact.

2b
18″

60°

O
θ

C

A

b

B

A

2b

m2

24″

m1
θ

B
O
Problem 3/347

* 3/348 The 26-in. drum rotates about a horizontal axis
with a constant angular velocity ⍀ ϭ 7.5 rad/sec.
The small block A has no motion relative to the
drum surface as it passes the bottom position ␪ ϭ 0.
Determine the coefﬁcient of static friction ␮s
which would result in block slippage at an angular
position ␪; plot your expression for 0 Յ ␪ Յ 180Њ.
Determine the minimum required coefﬁcient value
␮min which would allow the block to remain ﬁxed
relative to the drum throughout a full revolution.
For a friction coefﬁcient slightly less than ␮min, at
what angular position ␪ would slippage occur?

24″
Problem 3/349

* 3/350 A particle of mass m is introduced with zero velocity at r ϭ 0 when ␪ ϭ 0. It slides outward through
the smooth hollow tube, which is driven at the constant angular velocity ␻0 about a horizontal axis
through point O. If the length l of the tube is 1 m
and ␻0 ϭ 0.5 rad/s, determine the time t after release and the angular displacement ␪ for which the
particle exits the tube.

Ω = 7.5 rad/sec
O
θ

r = 13″
O

m

A

θ

Problem 3/348

ω0

Problem 3/350

r

264

Chapter 3

Kinetics of Particles

* 3/351 The tennis player practices by hitting the ball
against the wall at A. The ball bounces off the
court surface at B and then up to its maximum
height at C. For the conditions shown in the ﬁgure,
plot the location of point C for values of the coefﬁcient of restitution in the range 0.5 Յ e Յ 0.9. (The
value of e is common to both A and B.) For what
value of e is x ϭ 0 at point C, and what is the corresponding value of y?

* 3/353 The simple pendulum of length l ϭ 0.5 m has an
˙
angular velocity ␪0 ϭ 0.2 rad/s at time t ϭ 0 when
␪ ϭ 0. Derive an integral expression for the time t
required to reach an arbitrary angle ␪. Plot t vs. ␪
for 0 Յ ␪ Յ ␲ and state the value of t for ␪ ϭ ␲.
2
2
·
θ0 = 0.2 rad/s

θ

y
l
5°

80 ft/sec
A

3′

C
x

B
30′

Problem 3/353

Problem 3/351

* 3/352 The system of Prob. 3/154 is repeated here. If the
0.75-kg particle is released from rest when in the
position ␪ ϭ 0, where the spring is unstretched, determine and plot its speed v as a function of ␪ over
the range 0 Յ ␪ Յ ␪max, where ␪max is the value of ␪
at which the system momentarily comes to rest.
The value of the spring modulus k is 100 N/m, and
friction can be neglected. State the maximum
speed and the angle ␪ at which it occurs.

* 3/354 A 1.8-lb particle P is given an initial velocity v0 ϭ
1 ft/sec at the position ␪ ϭ 0 and subsequently
slides along the circular path of radius r ϭ 1.5 ft.
A drag force of magnitude kv acts in the direction
opposite to the velocity. If the drag parameter k ϭ
0.2 lb-sec/ft, determine and plot the particle speed
v and the normal force N exerted on the particle by
the surface as functions of ␪ over the range
0 Յ ␪ Յ 90Њ. Determine the maximum values of v
and N and the values of ␪ at which these maxima
occur. Neglect friction between the particle and
the circular surface.
O

B

r

θ

P
0.6 m
k

O

θ

0.6
m

0.75 kg
A

Problem 3/352

Problem 3/354

The forces of interaction between the rotating blades of this Harrier jumpjet engine and the air which
passes over them is a subject which is introduced in this chapter.
© Frits van Gansewinkel/Alamy

Kinetics of Systems
of Particles

4

CHAPTER OUTLINE
4/1 Introduction
4/2 Generalized Newton’s Second Law
4/3 Work-Energy
4/4 Impulse-Momentum
4/5 Conservation of Energy and Momentum
4/6 Steady Mass Flow
4/7 Variable Mass
4/8 Chapter Review

4/1

Introduction

In the previous two chapters, we have applied the principles of dynamics to the motion of a particle. Although we focused primarily on the
kinetics of a single particle in Chapter 3, we mentioned the motion of
two particles, considered together as a system, when we discussed workenergy and impulse-momentum.
Our next major step in the development of dynamics is to extend
these principles, which we applied to a single particle, to describe the
motion of a general system of particles. This extension will unify the remaining topics of dynamics and enable us to treat the motion of both
rigid bodies and nonrigid systems.
Recall that a rigid body is a solid system of particles wherein the
distances between particles remain essentially unchanged. The overall
motions found with machines, land and air vehicles, rockets and spacecraft, and many moving structures provide examples of rigid-body problems. On the other hand, we may need to study the time-dependent
changes in the shape of a nonrigid, but solid, body due to elastic or inelastic deformations. Another example of a nonrigid body is a deﬁned
mass of liquid or gaseous particles ﬂowing at a speciﬁed rate. Examples
are the air and fuel ﬂowing through the turbine of an aircraft engine,
the burned gases issuing from the nozzle of a rocket motor, or the water
passing through a rotary pump.
267

268

Chapter 4

Kinetics of Systems of Particles

Although we can extend the equations for single-particle motion to
a general system of particles without much difﬁculty, it is difﬁcult to understand the generality and signiﬁcance of these extended principles
without considerable problem experience. For this reason, you should
frequently review the general results obtained in the following articles
during the remainder of your study of dynamics. In this way, you will
understand how these broader principles unify dynamics.

KEY CONCEPTS
4/2

F2

F3

F1
f3

mi
f2
f1
mi

ρi
G

ri
–
r

Generalized Newton’s Second Law

We now extend Newton’s second law of motion to cover a general
mass system which we model by considering n mass particles bounded
by a closed surface in space, Fig. 4/1. This bounding envelope, for example, may be the exterior surface of a given rigid body, the bounding surface of an arbitrary portion of the body, the exterior surface of a rocket
containing both rigid and ﬂowing particles, or a particular volume of
ﬂuid particles. In each case, the system to be considered is the mass
within the envelope, and that mass must be clearly deﬁned and isolated.
Figure 4/1 shows a representative particle of mass mi of the system
isolated with forces F1, F2, F3, . . . acting on mi from sources external to
the envelope, and forces f1, f2, f3, . . . acting on mi from sources internal
to the system boundary. The external forces are due to contact with external bodies or to external gravitational, electric, or magnetic effects.
The internal forces are forces of reaction with other mass particles
within the boundary. The particle of mass mi is located by its position
vector ri measured from the nonaccelerating origin O of a Newtonian
set of reference axes.* The center of mass G of the isolated system of
particles is located by the position vector r which, from the deﬁnition of
the mass center as covered in statics, is given by
mr ϭ Σmiri

O

System boundary

Figure 4/1

where the total system mass is m ϭ Σmi. The summation sign Σ represents the summation Σn over all n particles.
iϭ1
Newton’s second law, Eq. 3/3, when applied to mi gives
F1 ϩ F2 ϩ F3 ϩ ⅐ ⅐ ⅐ ϩ f1 ϩ f2 ϩ f3 ϩ ⅐ ⅐ ⅐ ϭ mi¨i
r
where ¨i is the acceleration of mi. A similar equation may be written for
r
each of the particles of the system. If these equations written for all particles of the system are added together, the result is
r
ΣF ϩ Σf ϭ Σmi¨i
The term ΣF then becomes the vector sum of all forces acting on all
particles of the isolated system from sources external to the system, and
*It was shown in Art. 3/14 that any nonrotating and nonaccelerating set of axes constitutes
a Newtonian reference system in which the principles of Newtonian mechanics are valid.

Article 4/3

Σf becomes the vector sum of all forces on all particles produced by the
internal actions and reactions between particles. This last sum is identically zero since all internal forces occur in pairs of equal and opposite
actions and reactions. By differentiating the equation deﬁning r twice
¨
r
with time, we have mr ϭ Σmi¨i where m has a zero time derivative as
long as mass is not entering or leaving the system.* Substitution into
the summation of the equations of motion gives

¨
ΣF ϭ mr

or

F ϭ ma

(4/1)

r
where a is the acceleration ¨ of the center of mass of the system.
Equation 4/1 is the generalized Newton’s second law of motion for a
mass system and is called the equation of motion of m. The equation
states that the resultant of the external forces on any system of masses
equals the total mass of the system times the acceleration of the center
of mass. This law expresses the so-called principle of motion of the mass
center.
Observe that a is the acceleration of the mathematical point which
represents instantaneously the position of the mass center for the given
n particles. For a nonrigid body, this acceleration need not represent the
acceleration of any particular particle. Note also that Eq. 4/1 holds for
each instant of time and is therefore an instantaneous relationship.
Equation 4/1 for the mass system had to be proved, as it cannot be inferred directly from Eq. 3/3 for a single particle.
Equation 4/1 may be expressed in component form using x-y-z coordinates or whatever coordinate system is most convenient for the problem at hand. Thus,
ΣFx ϭ max

ΣFy ϭ may

ΣFz ϭ maz

(4/1a)

Although Eq. 4/1, as a vector equation, requires that the acceleration vector a have the same direction as the resultant external force ΣF,
it does not follow that ΣF necessarily passes through G. In general, in
fact, ΣF does not pass through G, as will be shown later.

4/3

Work-Energy

In Art. 3/6 we developed the work-energy relation for a single particle, and we noted that it applies to a system of two joined particles.
Now consider the general system of Fig. 4/1, where the work-energy relation for the representative particle of mass mi is (U1-2)i ϭ ⌬Ti. Here
(U1-2)i is the work done on mi during an interval of motion by all forces
F1 ϩ F2 ϩ F3 ϩ ⅐ ⅐ ⅐ applied from sources external to the system and by
all forces f1 ϩ f2 ϩ f3 ϩ ⅐ ⅐ ⅐ applied from sources internal to the system.
1
The kinetic energy of mi is Ti ϭ 2 mivi2, where vi is the magnitude of the
r
particle velocity vi ϭ ˙i.

*If m is a function of time, a more complex situation develops; this situation is discussed in
Art. 4/7 on variable mass.

Work-Energy

269

270

Chapter 4

Kinetics of Systems of Particles

Work-Energy Relation
For the entire system, the sum of the work-energy equations written for all particles is Σ(U1-2)i ϭ Σ⌬Ti, which may be represented by the
same expressions as Eqs. 3/15 and 3/15a of Art. 3/6, namely,
U1-2 ϭ ⌬T

fi

–fi

Figure 4/2

or

T1 ϩ U1-2 ϭ T2

(4/2)

where U1-2 ϭ Σ(U1-2)i, the work done by all forces, external and internal,
on all particles, and ⌬T is the change in the total kinetic energy T ϭ ΣTi
of the system.
For a rigid body or a system of rigid bodies joined by ideal frictionless connections, no net work is done by the internal interacting forces
or moments in the connections. We see that the work done by all pairs
of internal forces, labeled here as fi and Ϫfi, at a typical connection, Fig.
4/2, in the system is zero since their points of application have identical
displacement components while the forces are equal but opposite. For
this situation U1-2 becomes the work done on the system by the external
forces only.
For a nonrigid mechanical system which includes elastic members
capable of storing energy, a part of the work done by the external forces
goes into changing the internal elastic potential energy Ve. Also, if the
work done by the gravity forces is excluded from the work term and is
accounted for instead by the changes in gravitational potential energy
Vg, then we may equate the work UЈ done on the system during an in1-2
terval of motion to the change ⌬E in the total mechanical energy of the
system. Thus, UЈ ϭ ⌬E or
1-2
UЈ ϭ ⌬T ϩ ⌬V
1-2

(4/3)

or
T1 ϩ V1 ϩ UЈ ϭ T2 ϩ V2
1-2

(4/3a)

which are the same as Eqs. 3/21 and 3/21a. Here, as in Chapter 3, V ϭ
Vg ϩ Ve represents the total potential energy.

Kinetic Energy Expression
We now examine the expression T ϭ Σ 1 mivi2 for the kinetic energy
2
of the mass system in more detail. By our principle of relative motion
discussed in Art. 2/8, we may write the velocity of the representative
particle as
vi ϭ v ϩ ␳ i
˙
where v is the velocity of the mass center G and ␳ i is the velocity of mi
˙
with respect to a translating reference frame moving with the mass

Article 4/4

center G. We recall the identity vi2 ϭ vi ⅐ vi and write the kinetic energy
of the system as
T ϭ Σ 1 mivi ⅐ vi ϭ Σ 1 mi(v ϩ ␳ i) ⅐ (v ϩ ␳ i)
˙
˙
2
2
ϭ Σ 1 miv 2 ϩ Σ 1 mi͉ ␳ i ͉2 ϩ Σmiv ⅐ ␳ i
˙
˙
2
2
Because ␳i is measured from the mass center, Σmi ␳i ϭ 0 and the third
d
1
1
1
term is v ⅐ Σmi ␳ i ϭ v ⅐ Σ(mi ␳i) ϭ 0. Also Σ 2 miv 2 ϭ 2 v 2 Σmi ϭ 2 mv 2.
˙
dt
Therefore, the total kinetic energy becomes
T ϭ 1 mv 2 ϩ Σ 1 mi͉ ␳ i ͉2
˙
2
2

(4/4)

This equation expresses the fact that the total kinetic energy of a mass
system equals the kinetic energy of mass-center translation of the system as a whole plus the kinetic energy due to motion of all particles relative to the mass center.

4/4

Impulse-Momentum

We now develop the concepts of momentum and impulse as applied
to a system of particles.

Linear Momentum
From our deﬁnition in Art. 3/8, the linear momentum of the representative particle of the system depicted in Fig. 4/1 is Gi ϭ mivi where
r
the velocity of mi is vi ϭ ˙i.
The linear momentum of the system is deﬁned as the vector sum of
the linear momenta of all of its particles, or G ϭ Σmivi. By substituting
the relative-velocity relation vi ϭ v ϩ ␳ i and noting again that Σmi ␳i ϭ
˙
m␳ ϭ 0, we obtain
G ϭ Σmi(v ϩ ␳ i) ϭ Σmiv ϩ
˙
ϭ v Σmi ϩ

d
Σmi ␳i
dt
d
(0)
dt

or
G ϭ mv

(4/5)

Thus, the linear momentum of any system of constant mass is the product of the mass and the velocity of its center of mass.
˙
The time derivative of G is mv ϭ ma, which by Eq. 4/1 is the resultant external force acting on the system. Thus, we have

˙
ΣF ϭ G

(4/6)

Impulse-Momentum

271

272

Chapter 4

Kinetics of Systems of Particles

which has the same form as Eq. 3/25 for a single particle. Equation 4/6
states that the resultant of the external forces on any mass system
equals the time rate of change of the linear momentum of the system. It
is an alternative form of the generalized second law of motion, Eq. 4/1.
As was noted at the end of the last article, ΣF, in general, does not pass
through the mass center G. In deriving Eq. 4/6, we differentiated with
respect to time and assumed that the total mass is constant. Thus, the
equation does not apply to systems whose mass changes with time.

Angular Momentum
We now determine the angular momentum of our general mass
system about the fixed point O, about the mass center G, and about an
arbitrary point P, shown in Fig. 4/3, which may have an acceleration
r
aP ϭ ¨P.
About a Fixed Point O. The angular momentum of the mass system
about the point O, ﬁxed in the Newtonian reference system, is deﬁned
as the vector sum of the moments of the linear momenta about O of all
particles of the system and is
HO ϭ Σ(ri ؋ mivi)

˙
The time derivative of the vector product is HO ϭ Σ(r i ؋ mivi) ϩ
˙
Σ(ri ؋ mi˙i). The ﬁrst summation vanishes since the cross product of two
v
r
parallel vectors ˙i and mivi is zero. The second summation is Σ(ri ؋ miai ) ϭ
Σ(ri ؋ Fi), which is the vector sum of the moments about O of all forces
acting on all particles of the system. This moment sum ΣMO represents
only the moments of forces external to the system, since the internal
forces cancel one another and their moments add up to zero. Thus, the
moment sum is
˙
ΣMO ϭ HO

(4/7)

which has the same form as Eq. 3/31 for a single particle.

F3
F2
F1

mi
f3
f2

mi

ρi

f1

ρ'
i

ri

G
–
ρ

–
r
O (fixed)

rP

P (arbitrary)

Figure 4/3

System
boundary

Article 4/4

Equation 4/7 states that the resultant vector moment about any
ﬁxed point of all external forces on any system of mass equals the time
rate of change of angular momentum of the system about the ﬁxed
point. As in the linear-momentum case, Eq. 4/7 does not apply if the
total mass of the system is changing with time.
About the Mass Center G. The angular momentum of the mass
system about the mass center G is the sum of the moments of the linear
momenta about G of all particles and is
HG ϭ Σ␳i ؋ mi˙i
r

(4/8)

˙ ˙
r
We may write the absolute velocity ˙i as (r ϩ ␳ i) so that HG becomes
˙ ˙
HG ϭ Σ␳i ؋ mi(r ϩ ␳ i) ϭ Σ␳i ؋ mi˙ ϩ Σ␳i ؋ mi ␳ i
r
˙
The first term on the right side of this equation may be rewritten as
˙
Ϫr ؋ Σmi ␳i, which is zero because Σmi ␳i ϭ 0 by definition of the mass
center. Thus, we have
HG ϭ Σ␳i ؋ mi ␳ i
˙

(4/8a)

The expression of Eq. 4/8 is called the absolute angular momentum
r
because the absolute velocity ˙i is used. The expression of Eq. 4/8a is
called the relative angular momentum because the relative velocity ␳ i is
˙
used. With the mass center G as a reference, the absolute and relative
angular momenta are seen to be identical. We will see that this identity
does not hold for an arbitrary reference point P; there is no distinction
for a ﬁxed reference point O.
Differentiating Eq. 4/8 with respect to time gives

˙
˙ ˙
HG ϭ Σ ␳ i ؋ mi(r ϩ ␳ i) ϩ Σ␳i ؋ mi¨i
r
˙
r
The ﬁrst summation is expanded as Σ ␳ i ؋ mi˙ ϩ Σ ␳ i ؋ mi ␳ i. The ﬁrst
˙
˙
˙
d
˙
˙
Σmi␳i, which is zero
term may be rewritten as Ϫr ؋ Σmi ␳ i ϭ Ϫr ؋
˙
dt
from the deﬁnition of the mass center. The second term is zero because
the cross product of parallel vectors is zero. With Fi representing the
sum of all external forces acting on mi and fi the sum of all internal
forces acting on mi, the second summation by Newton’s second law becomes Σ␳i ؋ (Fi ϩ fi) ϭ Σ␳i ؋ Fi ϭ ΣMG, the sum of all external moments about point G. Recall that the sum of all internal moments Σ␳i ؋ fi
is zero. Thus, we are left with

˙
ΣMG ϭ HG

(4/9)

where we may use either the absolute or the relative angular momentum.
Equations 4/7 and 4/9 are among the most powerful of the governing equations in dynamics and apply to any deﬁned system of constant
mass—rigid or nonrigid.

Impulse-Momentum

273

274

Chapter 4

Kinetics of Systems of Particles

About an Arbitrary Point P. The angular momentum about an arr
bitrary point P (which may have an acceleration ¨P) will now be expressed with the notation of Fig. 4/3. Thus,
HP ϭ Σ␳Ј ؋ mi˙i ϭ Σ(␳ ϩ ␳i) ؋ mi˙i
r
r
i
r
The ﬁrst term may be written as ␳ ؋ Σmi˙i ϭ ␳ ؋ Σmivi ϭ ␳ ؋ mv. The
r
second term is Σ␳i ؋ mi˙i ϭ HG. Thus, rearranging gives
HP ϭ HG ϩ ␳ ؋ mv

·
ΣM G = H G

–
ΣF = ma
G
–
ρ

(4/10)

Equation 4/10 states that the absolute angular momentum about any
point P equals the angular momentum about G plus the moment about P
of the linear momentum mv of the system considered concentrated at G.
We now make use of the principle of moments developed in our
study of statics where we represented a force system by a resultant force
through any point, such as G, and a corresponding couple. Figure 4/4
represents the resultants of the external forces acting on the system expressed in terms of the resultant force ΣF through G and the corresponding couple ΣMG. We see that the sum of the moments about P of
all forces external to the system must equal the moment of their resultants. Therefore, we may write
ΣMP ϭ ΣMG ϩ ␳ ؋ ΣF
which, by Eqs. 4/9 and 4/6, becomes

P

Figure 4/4

˙
ΣMP ϭ HG ϩ ␳ ؋ ma

(4/11)

Equation 4/11 enables us to write the moment equation about any convenient moment center P and is easily visualized with the aid of Fig. 4/4.
This equation forms a rigorous basis for much of our treatment of planar rigid-body kinetics in Chapter 6.
We may also develop similar momentum relationships by using the
momentum relative to P. Thus, from Fig. 4/3
(HP)rel ϭ Σ␳Ј ؋ mi ␳ Ј
˙i
i
where ␳ Ј is the velocity of mi relative to P. With the substitution
˙i
␳Ј ϭ ␳ ϩ ␳i and ␳ Ј ϭ ˙ ϩ ␳ i we may write
˙i ␳ ˙
i
(HP)rel ϭ Σ␳ ؋ mi˙ ϩ Σ␳ ؋ mi ␳ i ϩ Σ␳i ؋ mi˙ ϩ Σ␳i ؋ mi ␳ i
␳
␳
˙
˙
d
Σmi ␳i
dt
˙
and the third summation is Ϫ␳ ؋ Σmi ␳i where both are zero by deﬁnition of the mass center. The fourth summation is (HG)rel. Rearranging
gives us
The ﬁrst summation is ␳ ؋ mvrel. The second summation is ␳ ؋

(HP)rel ϭ (HG)rel ϩ ␳ ؋ mvrel

(4/12)

Article 4/5

Conservation of Energy and Momentum

where (HG)rel is the same as HG (see Eqs. 4/8 and 4/8a). Note the similarity of Eqs. 4/12 and 4/10.
The moment equation about P may now be expressed in terms of
the angular momentum relative to P. We differentiate the deﬁnition
r
r
(HP)rel ϭ Σ␳Ј ؋ mi ␳ Ј with time and make the substitution ¨i ϭ ¨P ϩ ␳ Ј
˙i
¨i
i
to obtain

˙
(Hp)rel ϭ Σ ␳ Ј ؋ mi ␳ Ј ϩ Σ␳Ј ؋ mi¨i Ϫ Σ␳Ј ؋ mi¨P
r
r
˙i
˙i
i
i
The ﬁrst summation is identically zero, and the second summation is the
sum ΣMP of the moments of all external forces about P. The third summation becomes Σ␳Ј ؋ miaP ϭ ϪaP ؋ Σmi␳Ј ϭ ϪaP ؋ m␳ ϭ ␳ ؋ maP. Subi
i
stituting and rearranging terms give

˙
ΣMP ϭ (HP)rel ϩ ␳ ؋ maP

(4/13)

The form of Eq. 4/13 is convenient when a point P whose acceleration is
known is used as a moment center. The equation reduces to the simpler
form

4/5

Conservation of Energy and Momentum

Under certain common conditions, there is no net change in the
total mechanical energy of a system during an interval of motion. Under
other conditions, there is no net change in the momentum of a system.
These conditions are treated separately as follows.

Conservation of Energy
A mass system is said to be conservative if it does not lose energy by
virtue of internal friction forces which do negative work or by virtue of inelastic members which dissipate energy upon cycling. If no work is done
on a conservative system during an interval of motion by external forces
(other than gravity or other potential forces), then none of the energy of
the system is lost. For this case, UЈ ϭ 0 and we may write Eq. 4/3 as
1-2
⌬T ϩ ⌬V ϭ 0

(4/14)

or
T1 ϩ V1 ϭ T2 ϩ V2

(4/14a)

which expresses the law of conservation of dynamical energy. The total
energy E ϭ T ϩ V is a constant, so that E1 ϭ E2. This law holds only in
the ideal case where internal kinetic friction is sufﬁciently small to be
neglected.

275

Chapter 4

Kinetics of Systems of Particles

Conservation of Momentum
If, for a certain interval of time, the resultant external force ΣF acting on a conservative or nonconservative mass system is zero, Eq. 4/6 re˙
quires that G ϭ 0, so that during this interval
G1 ϭ G2

(4/15)

which expresses the principle of conservation of linear momentum.
Thus, in the absence of an external impulse, the linear momentum of a
system remains unchanged.
Similarly, if the resultant moment about a ﬁxed point O or about
the mass center G of all external forces on any mass system is zero, Eq.
4/7 or 4/9 requires, respectively, that
(HO)1 ϭ (HO)2

or

(HG)1 ϭ (HG)2

(4/16)

These relations express the principle of conservation of angular momentum for a general mass system in the absence of an angular impulse.
Thus, if there is no angular impulse about a ﬁxed point (or about the
mass center), the angular momentum of the system about the ﬁxed
point (or about the mass center) remains unchanged. Either equation
may hold without the other.
We proved in Art. 3/14 that the basic laws of Newtonian mechanics
hold for measurements made relative to a set of axes which translate
with a constant velocity. Thus, Eqs. 4/1 through 4/16 are valid provided
all quantities are expressed relative to the translating axes.
Equations 4/1 through 4/16 are among the most important of the basic
derived laws of mechanics. In this chapter we have derived these laws for
the most general system of constant mass to establish the generality of
these laws. Common applications of these laws are speciﬁc mass systems
such as rigid and nonrigid solids and certain ﬂuid systems, which are discussed in the following articles. Study these laws carefully and compare
them with their more restricted forms encountered earlier in Chapter 3.

Photo Researchers, Inc.

276

The principles of particle-system kinetics form the foundation
for the study of the forces associated with the water-spraying
equipment of these firefighting boats at the site of the Deepwater Horizon fire in the Gulf of Mexico.

Article 4/5

Conservation of Energy and Momentum

SAMPLE PROBLEM 4/1

z
v

The system of four particles has the indicated particle
masses, positions, velocities, and external forces. Determine r, ˙,
r
˙
˙
¨, T, G, HO, HO, HG, and HG.
r

2m

͚miri m(2di Ϫ 2dj) ϩ 2m(dk) ϩ 3m(Ϫ2di) ϩ 4m(dj)
ᕡ rϭ
ϭ
͚mi
m ϩ 2m ϩ 3m ϩ 4m
ϭ d(Ϫ0.4i ϩ 0.2j ϩ 0.2k)

O
2d

v

3

F

4m
4

y

Ans.

ϭ v(0.3i ϩ 0.3j ϩ 0.3k)

Helpful Hints

Ans.

Fi ϩ Fj
F
¨ ϭ ͚F ϭ
r
ϭ
(i ϩ j)
10m

d

x

.
͚mi˙i m(Ϫvi ϩ vj) ϩ 2m(vj) ϩ 3m(vk) ϩ 4m(vi)
r
ϭ
r ϭ
͚mi
10m

͚mi

2d

2v
1

v

d

2d

The position of the mass center of the system is

3m

2

F
m

Solution.

277

ᕡ All summation signs are from i = 1
to 4, and all are performed in order
of the mass numbers in the given
ﬁgure.

Ans.

10m

1
11
[m(Ί2v)2 ϩ 2mv2 ϩ 3mv2 ϩ 4mv2] ϭ
mv2
2
2

Ans.

.
G ϭ (͚mi)r ϭ 10m(v)(0.3i ϩ 0.3j ϩ 0.3k) ϭ mv(3i ϩ 3j ϩ3k)

Ans.

T ϭ ͚ 1 mivi2 ϭ
2

.
ᕢ HO ϭ ͚ri ؋ mi ri ϭ 0 Ϫ 2mvdi ϩ 3mv(2d)j Ϫ 4mvdk
ϭ mvd(Ϫ2i ϩ 6j Ϫ 4k)

ᕢ Because of the simple geometry,
Ans.

.
H O ϭ ͚MO ϭ Ϫ2dF k ϩ Fdj ϭ Fd( j Ϫ 2k)

the cross products are performed by
inspection.

Ans.

For HG, we use Eq. 4/10:

ᕣ [HG ϭ HO ϩ ␳ ؋ mv ]

ᕣ Using Eq. 4/10 with P replaced by O

HG ϭ mvd(Ϫ2i ϩ 6j Ϫ 4k) Ϫ d(Ϫ0.4i ϩ 0.2j ϩ 0.2k) ؋
Ans.
10mv(0.3i ϩ 0.3j ϩ 0.3k) ϭ mvd(Ϫ2i ϩ 4.2j Ϫ 2.2k)
.
For HG, we could use Eq. 4/9 or Eq. 4/11 with P replaced by O. Using the latter,
we have
.
[HG ϭ ͚MO Ϫ ␳ ؋ ma]
F
΂10m΃(i ϩ j)

.

ᕤ We again recognize that ␳ ϭ r here

ᕤ HG ϭ Fd(j Ϫ 2k) Ϫ d(Ϫ0.4i ϩ 0.2j ϩ 0.2k) ؋ 10m
ϭ Fd(0.2i ϩ 0.8j Ϫ 1.4k)

is more expedient than using Eq. 4/8
or 4/8a. The m in Eq. 4/10 is the
total mass, which is 10m in this example. The quantity ␳ in Eq. 4/10,
with P replaced by O, is r.

Ans.

and that the mass of this system is
10m.

278

Chapter 4

Kinetics of Systems of Particles

SAMPLE PROBLEM 4/2

y

Each of the three balls has a mass m and is welded to the rigid equiangular
frame of negligible mass. The assembly rests on a smooth horizontal surface. If a
force F is suddenly applied to one bar as shown, determine (a) the acceleration of
¨
point O and (b) the angular acceleration ␪ of the frame.

m
F
r
b
Weld

Solution. (a) Point O is the mass center of the system of the three balls, so
that its acceleration is given by Eq. 4/1.

ᕡ [ΣF ϭ ma ]

Fi ϭ 3ma

O
120°

r

a ϭ aO ϭ

F
i
3m

Ans.

120°

x
r

m

m

Helpful Hints

ᕡ We note that the result depends only

¨
(b) We determine ␪ from the moment principle, Eq. 4/9. To ﬁnd HG we note
that the velocity of each ball relative to the mass center O as measured in the
˙
˙
nonrotating axes x-y is r ␪ , where ␪ is the common angular velocity of the
spokes. The angular momentum of the system about O is the sum of the moments of the relative linear momenta as shown by Eq. 4/8, so it is expressed by

on the magnitude and direction of F
and not on b, which locates the line
of action of F.
Grel

˙
˙
HO ϭ HG ϭ 3(mr ␪ )r ϭ 3mr2 ␪
ᕢ Equation 4/9 now gives

˙
[ΣMG ϭ HG]

Fb ϭ

·
θ

·
θ

d
˙
¨
(3mr2 ␪ ) ϭ 3mr2 ␪
dt

so

¨
␪ϭ

Fb
3mr2

O

Ans.

·
θ

˙
ᕢ Although ␪ is initially zero, we need

the expression for HO ϭ HG in order
˙
¨
to get HG. We observe also that ␪ is
independent of the motion of O.
y

SAMPLE PROBLEM 4/3
Consider the same conditions as for Sample Problem 4/2, except that the
spokes are freely hinged at O and so do not constitute a rigid system. Explain the
difference between the two problems.

m
F
r
Hinge

Solution.

The generalized Newton’s second law holds for any mass system, so
that the acceleration a of the mass center G is the same as with Sample Problem
4/1, namely,
aϭ

F
i
3m

r

m

Ans.

Although G coincides with O at the instant represented, the motion of the hinge
O is not the same as the motion of G since O will not remain the center of mass
as the angles between the spokes change.
˙
ᕡ
Both ΣMG and HG have the same values for the two problems at the instant
represented. However, the angular motions of the spokes in this problem are all
different and are not easily determined.

b
120°
O
120°

x
r

m

Helpful Hint

ᕡ This present system could be dismembered and the motion equations written for each of the parts, with the
unknowns eliminated one by one. Or
a more sophisticated method using
the equations of Lagrange could be
employed. (See the ﬁrst author’s Dynamics, 2nd Edition SI Version, 1975,
for a discussion of this approach.)

Article 4/5

Conservation of Energy and Momentum

SAMPLE PROBLEM 4/4

279

vA
A
z

B

/s

P

30
0m
u=

A shell with a mass of 20 kg is ﬁred from point O, with a velocity u ϭ 300
m/s in the vertical x-z plane at the inclination shown. When it reaches the top
of its trajectory at P, it explodes into three fragments A, B, and C. Immediately after the explosion, fragment A is observed to rise vertically a distance
of 500 m above P, and fragment B is seen to have a horizontal velocity vB and
eventually lands at point Q. When recovered, the masses of the fragments A,
B, and C are found to be 5, 9, and 6 kg, respectively. Calculate the velocity
which fragment C has immediately after the explosion. Neglect atmospheric
resistance.

vB

C

y
4

vC
h

3
O
4000 m
45°

Solution.

From our knowledge of projectile motion, the time required for
the shell to reach P and its vertical rise are

Q
x

t ϭ uz /g ϭ 300(4/5)/9.81 ϭ 24.5 s

hϭ

uz2 [(300)(4/5)]2
ϭ
ϭ 2940 m
2g
2(9.81)

The velocity of A has the magnitude
vA ϭ Ί2ghA ϭ Ί2(9.81)(500) ϭ 99.0 m/s
With no z-component of velocity initially, fragment B requires 24.5 s to return to
the ground. Thus, its horizontal velocity, which remains constant, is
vB ϭ s/t ϭ 4000/24.5 ϭ 163.5 m/s
Since the force of the explosion is internal to the system of the shell and its
three fragments, the linear momentum of the system remains unchanged during
the explosion. Thus,

ᕡ [G1 ϭ G2]

ᕡ The velocity v of the shell at the top

mv ϭ mAvA ϩ mBvB ϩ mCvC

of its trajectory is, of course, the constant horizontal component of its initial velocity u, which becomes u(3/5).

3

20(300)(5)i ϭ 5(99.0k) ϩ 9(163.5)(i cos 45Њ ϩ j sin 45Њ) ϩ 6vC
6vC ϭ 2560i Ϫ 1040j Ϫ 495k

ᕢ

ᕢ We note that the mass center of the

vC ϭ 427i Ϫ 173.4j Ϫ 82.5k m/s
vC ϭ Ί(427)2 ϩ (173.4)2 ϩ (82.5)2 ϭ 468 m/s

Helpful Hints

Ans.

three fragments while still in ﬂight
continues to follow the same trajectory which the shell would have followed if it had not exploded.

280

Chapter 4

Kinetics of Systems of Particles

SAMPLE PROBLEM 4/5

80 rev/min

3

The 32.2-lb carriage A moves horizontally in its guide with a speed of 4
ft/sec and carries two assemblies of balls and light rods which rotate about a
shaft at O in the carriage. Each of the four balls weighs 3.22 lb. The assembly on
the front face rotates counterclockwise at a speed of 80 rev/min, and the assembly on the back side rotates clockwise at a speed of 100 rev/min. For the entire
system, calculate (a) the kinetic energy T, (b) the magnitude G of the linear momentum, and (c) the magnitude HO of the angular momentum about point O.

2
18″

12″
O

4 ft/sec
A

18″

12″

1
4

Solution. (a) Kinetic energy. The velocities of the balls with respect to O are
(vrel)1,2 ϭ

18 80(2␲)
ϭ 12.57 ft/sec
12 60

(vrel)3,4 ϭ

˙
[͉ ␳ i ͉ ϭ vrel ϭ r ␪ ]
˙

100 rev/min

12 100(2␲)
ϭ 10.47 ft/sec
12
60

The kinetic energy of the system is given by Eq. 4/4. The translational part is

΂

Helpful Hints

΃

3.22 2
1 32.2
1
2
2 mv ϭ 2 32.2 ϩ 4 32.2 (4 ) ϭ 11.20 ft-lb

ᕡ

ᕡ Note that the mass m is the total

The rotational part of the kinetic energy depends on the squares of the relative
velocities and is
Σ 1 mi͉ ␳ i ͉2 ϭ 2
˙
2

ᕢ

3.22
΄1 32.2 (12.57) ΅
2
2

(1,2)

ϩ2

3.22
΄1 32.2 (10.47) ΅
2
2

ᕢ Note that the direction of rotation,

(3,4)

clockwise or counterclockwise, makes
no difference in the calculation of kinetic energy, which depends on the
square of the velocity.

ϭ 15.80 ϩ 10.96 ϭ 26.8 ft-lb
The total kinetic energy is
1

mass, carriage plus the four balls, and
that v is the velocity of the mass center O, which is the carriage velocity.

1

T ϭ 2 mv 2 ϩ Σ 2 mi͉ ␳ i ͉2 ϭ 11.20 ϩ 26.8 ϭ 38.0 ft-lb
˙

Ans.

(b) Linear momentum. The linear momentum of the system by Eq. 4/5 is
the total mass times vO, the velocity of the center of mass. Thus,

ᕣ [G ϭ mv]

Gϭ

΂32.2 ϩ 4 3.22΃(4) ϭ 5.6 lb-sec
32.2
32.2

Ans.

(c) Angular momentum about O.

The angular momentum about O is
due to the moments of the linear momenta of the balls. Taking counterclockwise
as positive, we have

ᕣ There is a temptation to overlook
the contribution of the balls since
their linear momenta relative to O
in each pair are in opposite directions and cancel. However, each ball
also has a velocity component v and
hence a momentum component miv.

HO ϭ Σ͉ri ؋ mivi ͉

ᕤ

΄ ΂3.22΃΂18΃(12.57)΅
32.2 12

HO ϭ 2

(1,2)

ᕤ Contrary to the case of kinetic en-

΄ ΂3.22΃΂12΃(10.47)΅
32.2 12

Ϫ 2

ϭ 3.77 Ϫ 2.09 ϭ 1.676 ft-lb-sec

(3,4)

Ans.

ergy where the direction of rotation
was immaterial, angular momentum
is a vector quantity and the direction
of rotation must be accounted for.

Article 4/5

PROBLEMS
Introductory Problems
4/1 The system of three particles has the indicated particle masses, velocities, and external forces. Determine
˙
r, ˙, ¨, T, HO, and HO for this two-dimensional system.
r r

Problems

281

4/5 The two 2-kg balls are initially at rest on the horizontal surface when a vertical force F ϭ 60 N is applied
to the junction of the attached wires as shown. Compute the vertical component ay of the initial acceleration of each ball by considering the system as a whole.
y

v

y
2m

F

4m

2v

F
θ θ

d
m

O

2d

x

2 kg

(stationary)

2 kg

Problem 4/1
Problem 4/5

4/2 For the particle system of Prob. 4/1, determine HG
.
and HG.
4/3 The system of three particles has the indicated particle masses, velocities, and external forces. Determine
˙
r, ˙ , ¨, T, HO, and HO for this three–dimensional
r r
system.
z

4m

4/6 Three monkeys A, B, and C weighing 20, 25, and 15 lb,
respectively, are climbing up and down the rope
suspended from D. At the instant represented, A is
descending the rope with an acceleration of 5 ft/sec2,
and C is pulling himself up with an acceleration of
3 ft/sec2. Monkey B is climbing up with a constant
speed of 2 ft/sec. Treat the rope and monkeys as a
complete system and calculate the tension T in the
rope at D.

D

v
1.5d

A

F

3v
d

x

m

O
2v

B
2d
2m

y

Problem 4/3

C

4/4 For the particle system of Prob. 4/3, determine HG
˙
and HG.
Problem 4/6

282

Chapter 4

Kinetics of Systems of Particles

4/7 The three small spheres are connected by the cords
and spring and are supported by a smooth horizontal
surface. If a force F ϭ 6.4 N is applied to one of the
cords, ﬁnd the acceleration a of the mass center of the
spheres for the instant depicted.

4/10 The four systems slide on a smooth horizontal surface and have the same mass m. The conﬁgurations
of mass in the two pairs are identical. What can be
said about the acceleration of the mass center for
each system? Explain any difference in the accelerations of the members.

0.8 kg
Weld

Hinge

Hinge

0.3 kg
F

F

0.5 kg

F

F

F

Problem 4/7

Problem 4/10

4/8 The two spheres, each of mass m, are connected by
the spring and hinged bars of negligible mass. The
spheres are free to slide in the smooth guides up the
incline ␪. Determine the acceleration aC of the center
C of the spring.

4/11 The total linear momentum of a system of ﬁve particles at time t ϭ 2.2 s is given by G2.2 ϭ 3.4i Ϫ 2.6j ϩ
4.6k kg ⅐ m/s. At time t ϭ 2.4 s, the linear momentum
has changed to G2.4 ϭ 3.7i Ϫ 2.2j ϩ 4.9k kg ⅐ m/s.
Calculate the magnitude F of the time average of the
resultant of the external forces acting on the system
during the interval.

F

b

m

C
m
L

θ

Problem 4/8

4/12 The two small spheres, each of mass m, are rigidly
connected by a rod of negligible mass and are released
from rest in the position shown and slide down the
smooth circular guide in the vertical plane. Determine
their common velocity v as they reach the horizontal
dashed position. Also ﬁnd the force R between sphere
1 and the supporting surface an instant before the
sphere reaches the bottom position A.
y

4/9 Calculate the acceleration of the center of mass of the
system of the four 10-kg cylinders. Neglect friction
and the mass of the pulleys and cables.

1
m

x
45°

500 N 250 N
r

2
m

2

10
kg

10
kg

1

A
Problem 4/12

10
kg

10
kg

Problem 4/9

Article 4/5

Problems

283

Representative Problems
4/13 The two small spheres, each of mass m, and their
connecting rod of negligible mass are rotating about
their mass center G with an angular velocity ␻. At
the same instant the mass center has a velocity v in
the x-direction. Determine the angular momentum
HO of the assembly at the instant when G has coordinates x and y.

10 lb
Problem 4/15

m
4/16 A centrifuge consists of four cylindrical containers,
each of mass m, at a radial distance r from the rotation axis. Determine the time t required to bring the
centrifuge to an angular velocity ␻ from rest under a
constant torque M applied to the shaft. The diameter of each container is small compared with r, and
the mass of the shaft and supporting arms is small
compared with m.

r
y
ω

G

v

r

r

m
m

x

O
Problem 4/13

M

4/14 Each of the five connected particles has a mass of
0.6 kg, with G as the center of mass of the system.
At a certain instant the angular momentum of the
system about G is 1.20k kg ⅐ m2/s, and the x- and
y-components of the velocity of G are 3 m/s and
4 m/s, respectively. Calculate the angular momentum HO of the system about O for this instant.
y
0.4 m

Problem 4/16

4/17 The three small spheres are welded to the light
rigid frame which is rotating in a horizontal plane
about a vertical axis through O with an angular
˙
velocity ␪ ϭ 20 rad/s. If a couple MO ϭ 30 N ⅐ m is
applied to the frame for 5 seconds, compute the
˙
new angular velocity ␪ Ј.
3 kg

G
0.3 m

0.5 m
x

O

0.4 m

Problem 4/14

4/15 The three identical bars, each weighing 8 lb, are connected by the two freely pinned links of negligible
weight and are resting on a smooth horizontal surface. Calculate the initial acceleration a of the center
of the middle bar when the 10-lb force is applied to
the connecting link as shown.

4 kg

MO = 30 N·m
O
0.6 m
·
θ

3 kg
Problem 4/17

284

Chapter 4

Kinetics of Systems of Particles

4/18 The four 3-kg balls are rigidly mounted to the rotating frame and shaft, which are initially rotating
freely about the vertical z-axis at the angular rate of
20 rad/s clockwise when viewed from above. If a constant torque M ϭ 30 N ⅐ m is applied to the shaft, calculate the time t to reverse the direction of rotation
˙
and reach an angular velocity ␪ ϭ 20 rad/s in the
same sense as M.
z
3 kg

3 kg
0.5

0.3
m

0.3

m
0.5
·
θ

4/20 The 300-kg and 400-kg mine cars are rolling in opposite directions along the horizontal track with the
respective speeds of 0.6 m/s and 0.3 m/s. Upon impact the cars become coupled together. Just prior to
impact, a 100-kg boulder leaves the delivery chute
with a velocity of 1.2 m/s in the direction shown and
lands in the 300-kg car. Calculate the velocity v of
the system after the boulder has come to rest relative to the car. Would the ﬁnal velocity be the same
if the cars were coupled before the boulder dropped?

m

1.2 m/s

m

30°
3 kg

100 kg

3 kg

300 kg

400 kg

0.6 m/s

0.3 m/s

M

Problem 4/20
Problem 4/18

4/19 Billiard ball A is moving in the y-direction with a velocity of 2 m/s when it strikes ball B of identical size
and mass initially at rest. Following the impact, the
balls are observed to move in the directions shown.
Calculate the velocities vA and vB which the balls
have immediately after the impact. Treat the balls
as particles and neglect any friction forces acting on
the balls compared with the force of impact.

4/21 The three freight cars are rolling along the horizontal track with the velocities shown. After the impacts
occur, the three cars become coupled together and
move with a common velocity v. The weights of the
loaded cars A, B, and C are 130,000, 100,000, and
150,000 lb, respectively. Determine v and calculate
the percentage loss n of energy of the system due to
coupling.
2 mi/hr

1 mi/hr

1.5 mi/hr

A

B

C

y

vB
30°

50°
vA

Problem 4/21

B

2 m/s
A

Problem 4/19

4/22 The man of mass m1 and the woman of mass m2 are
standing on opposite ends of the platform of mass m0
which moves with negligible friction and is initially
at rest with s ϭ 0. The man and woman begin to approach each other. Derive an expression for the displacement s of the platform when the two meet in
terms of the displacement x1 of the man relative to
the platform.

Article 4/5

x1
m2

s

m1
A

m0

285

4/25 The three small spheres, each of mass m, are secured to the light rods to form a rigid unit supported
in the vertical plane by the smooth circular surface.
The force of constant magnitude P is applied perpendicular to one rod at its midpoint. If the unit starts
from rest at ␪ ϭ 0, determine (a) the minimum force
Pmin which will bring the unit to rest at ␪ ϭ 60Њ and
(b) the common velocity v of spheres 1 and 2 when
␪ ϭ 60Њ if P ϭ 2Pmin.

l
x2

Problems

Problem 4/22

4/23 The woman A, the captain B, and the sailor C weigh
120, 180, and 160 lb, respectively, and are sitting in
the 300-lb skiff which is gliding through the water
with a speed of 1 knot. If the three people change
their positions as shown in the second ﬁgure, ﬁnd
the distance x from the skiff to the position where it
would have been if the people had not moved. Neglect any resistance to motion afforded by the water.
Does the sequence or timing of the change in positions affect the ﬁnal result?
2′

6′

r/2

r/2

60°
P
θ

2

60°

1

8′

Problem 4/25
A

B

C

4/26 The three small steel balls, each of mass 2.75 kg, are
connected by the hinged links of negligible mass and
equal length. They are released from rest in the positions shown and slide down the quarter-circular
guide in the vertical plane. When the upper sphere
reaches the bottom position, the spheres have a horizontal velocity of 1.560 m/s. Calculate the energy
loss ⌬Q due to friction and the total impulse Ix on
the system of three spheres during this interval.

1 knot

x

4′

6′

B

4′

C

A

Problem 4/23

4/24 The two spheres are rigidly connected to the rod
of negligible mass and are initially at rest on the
smooth horizontal surface. A force F is suddenly applied to one sphere in the y-direction and imparts an
impulse of 10 N ⅐ s during a negligibly short period of
time. As the spheres pass the dashed position, calculate the velocity of each one.
y
1.5 kg

vy
ω

60

0m

m

1.5 kg

F
x
Problem 4/24

x

360
mm

Problem 4/26

286

Chapter 4

Kinetics of Systems of Particles

4/27 Two steel balls, each of mass m, are welded to a light
rod of length L and negligible mass and are initially
at rest on a smooth horizontal surface. A horizontal
force of magnitude F is suddenly applied to the rod
as shown. Determine (a) the instantaneous acceleration a of the mass center G and (b) the correspond¨
ing rate ␪ at which the angular velocity of the
assembly about G is changing with time.

L
––
2

m

30 km/h

x

18 m
18 m
v

L
––
2

b
F

4/29 The cars of a roller-coaster ride have a speed of 30
km/h as they pass over the top of the circular track.
Neglect any friction and calculate their speed v when
they reach the horizontal bottom position. At the top
position, the radius of the circular path of their mass
centers is 18 m, and all six cars have the same mass.

G

m

y

Problem 4/27

4/28 The small car, which has a mass of 20 kg, rolls freely
on the horizontal track and carries the 5-kg sphere
mounted on the light rotating rod with r ϭ 0.4 m. A
geared motor drive maintains a constant angular
˙
speed ␪ ϭ 4 rad/s of the rod. If the car has a velocity
v ϭ 0.6 m/s when ␪ ϭ 0, calculate v when ␪ ϭ 60Њ.
Neglect the mass of the wheels and any friction.

Problem 4/29

4/30 The two small spheres, each of mass m, are connected
by a cord of length 2b (measured to the centers of the
spheres) and are initially at rest on a smooth horizontal surface. A projectile of mass m0 with a velocity v0
perpendicular to the cord hits it in the middle, causing the deﬂection shown in part b of the ﬁgure. Determine the velocity v of m0 as the two spheres near
contact, with ␪ approaching 90Њ as indicated in part c
˙
of the ﬁgure. Also ﬁnd ␪ for this condition.
m
m
b

b

r
m0

θ

m0

v0
O

m
b
v

θ

b

θ

θ

b

b
m

m
m

v

(a)

(b)
Problem 4/30

Problem 4/28

(c)

Article 4/5
4/31 The carriage of mass 2m is free to roll along the horizontal rails and carries the two spheres, each of
mass m, mounted on rods of length l and negligible
mass. The shaft to which the rods are secured is
mounted in the carriage and is free to rotate. If the
system is released from rest with the rods in the vertical position where ␪ ϭ 0, determine the velocity vx
˙
of the carriage and the angular velocity ␪ of the rods
for the instant when ␪ ϭ 180Њ. Treat the carriage
and the spheres as particles and neglect any friction.

Problems

287

᭤4/33 A ﬂexible nonextensible rope of mass ␳ per unit
length and length equal to 1/4 of the circumference
of the ﬁxed drum of radius r is released from rest in
the horizontal dashed position, with end B secured
to the top of the drum. When the rope ﬁnally comes
to rest with end A at C, determine the loss of energy
⌬Q of the system. What becomes of the lost energy?
B
r

m
A
m

θ

l

C

θ

l

Problem 4/33
x

2m

Problem 4/31

᭤ 4/32 The 50,000-lb ﬂatcar supports a 15,000-lb vehicle on
a 5Њ ramp built on the ﬂatcar. If the vehicle is released from rest with the ﬂatcar also at rest, determine the velocity v of the ﬂatcar when the vehicle
has rolled s ϭ 40 ft down the ramp just before hitting the stop at B. Neglect all friction and treat the
vehicle and the ﬂatcar as particles.

᭤ 4/34 A horizontal bar of mass m1 and small diameter is
suspended by two wires of length l from a carriage of
mass m2 which is free to roll along the horizontal
rails. If the bar and carriage are released from rest
with the wires making an angle ␪ with the vertical,
determine the velocity vb/c of the bar relative to the
carriage and the velocity vc of the carriage at the instant when ␪ ϭ 0. Neglect all friction and treat the
carriage and the bar as particles in the vertical plane
of motion.

m2

A
s
5°

B

θ

l
m1

Problem 4/34
Problem 4/32

288

Chapter 4

Kinetics of Systems of Particles

4/6

Steady Mass Flow

The momentum relation developed in Art. 4/4 for a general system
of mass provides us with a direct means of analyzing the action of mass
ﬂow where a change of momentum occurs. The dynamics of mass ﬂow is
of great importance in the description of ﬂuid machinery of all types including turbines, pumps, nozzles, air-breathing jet engines, and rockets.
The treatment of mass ﬂow in this article is not intended to take the
place of a study of ﬂuid mechanics, but merely to present the basic principles and equations of momentum which ﬁnd important use in ﬂuid
mechanics and in the general ﬂow of mass whether the form be liquid,
gaseous, or granular.
One of the most important cases of mass ﬂow occurs during steadyﬂow conditions where the rate at which mass enters a given volume
equals the rate at which mass leaves the same volume. The volume in
question may be enclosed by a rigid container, ﬁxed or moving, such as
the nozzle of a jet aircraft or rocket, the space between blades in a gas
turbine, the volume within the casing of a centrifugal pump, or the volume within the bend of a pipe through which a ﬂuid is ﬂowing at a
steady rate. The design of such ﬂuid machines depends on the analysis
of the forces and moments associated with the corresponding momentum changes of the ﬂowing mass.

ΣF

A2
v2

d2
A1

d1
O

v1

␳1A1v1 ϭ ␳2 A2v2 ϭ mЈ

(a)
ΣF

ΣF

Δm
Time t

Time t + Δt
(b)

Figure 4/5

Analysis of Flow Through a Rigid Container
Consider a rigid container, shown in section in Fig. 4/5a, into which
mass ﬂows in a steady stream at the rate mЈ through the entrance section of area A1. Mass leaves the container through the exit section of
area A2 at the same rate, so that there is no accumulation or depletion
of the total mass within the container during the period of observation.
The velocity of the entering stream is v1 normal to A1 and that of the
leaving stream is v2 normal to A2. If ␳1 and ␳2 are the respective densities of the two streams, conservation of mass requires that

Δm

(4/17)

To describe the forces which act, we isolate either the mass of ﬂuid
within the container or the entire container and the ﬂuid within it. We
would use the ﬁrst approach if the forces between the container and the
ﬂuid were to be described, and we would adopt the second approach
when the forces external to the container are desired.
The latter situation is our primary interest, in which case, the system isolated consists of the ﬁxed structure of the container and the ﬂuid
within it at a particular instant of time. This isolation is described by a
free-body diagram of the mass within a closed volume deﬁned by the exterior surface of the container and the entrance and exit surfaces. We
must account for all forces applied externally to this system, and in Fig.
4/5a the vector sum of this external force system is denoted by ΣF. Included in ΣF are
1. the forces exerted on the container at points of its attachment to
other structures, including attachments at A1 and A2, if present,

Article 4/6

Steady Mass Flow

289

2. the forces acting on the ﬂuid within the container at A1 and A2 due to
any static pressure which may exist in the ﬂuid at these positions, and
3. the weight of the ﬂuid and structure if appreciable.

˙
The resultant ΣF of all of these external forces must equal G, the time
rate of change of the linear momentum of the isolated system. This
statement follows from Eq. 4/6, which was developed in Art. 4/4 for any
systems of constant mass, rigid or nonrigid.
Incremental Analysis
˙
The expression for G may be obtained by an incremental analysis.
Figure 4/5b illustrates the system at time t when the system mass is
that of the container, the mass within it, and an increment ⌬m about to
enter during time ⌬t. At time t ϩ ⌬t the same total mass is that of the
container, the mass within it, and an equal increment ⌬m which leaves
the container in time ⌬t. The linear momentum of the container and
mass within it between the two sections A1 and A2 remains unchanged
during ⌬t so that the change in momentum of the system in time ⌬t is
⌬G ϭ (⌬m)v2 Ϫ (⌬m)v1 ϭ ⌬m(v2 Ϫ v1)

˙
Division by ⌬t and passage to the limit yield G ϭ mЈ⌬v, where
mЈ ϭ lim

⌬tl0

΂⌬m΃ ϭ dm
⌬t
dt

ΣF ϭ mЈ⌬v

Stocktrek Images, Inc.

Thus, by Eq. 4/6
(4/18)

Equation 4/18 establishes the relation between the resultant force on a
steady-ﬂow system and the corresponding mass ﬂow rate and vector velocity increment.*
Alternatively, we may note that the time rate of change of linear
momentum is the vector difference between the rate at which linear momentum leaves the system and the rate at which linear momentum en˙
ters the system. Thus, we may write G ϭ mЈv2 Ϫ mЈv1 ϭ mЈ⌬v, which
agrees with the foregoing result.
We can now see one of the powerful applications of our general
force-momentum equation which we derived for any mass system. Our
system here includes a body which is rigid (the structural container for
the mass stream) and particles which are in motion (the ﬂow of mass).
By deﬁning the boundary of the system, the mass within which is constant for steady-ﬂow conditions, we are able to utilize the generality of
Eq. 4/6. However, we must be very careful to account for all external

*We must be careful not to interpret dm/dt as the time derivative of the mass of the isolated
system. That derivative is zero since the system mass is constant for a steady-ﬂow process.
To help avoid confusion, the symbol mЈ rather than dm/dt is used to represent the steady
mass ﬂow rate.

The jet exhaust of this VTOL aircraft
can be vectored downward for vertical takeoffs and landings.

Chapter 4

Kinetics of Systems of Particles

forces acting on the system, and they become clear if our free-body diagram is correct.

Angular Momentum in Steady-Flow Systems
A similar formulation is obtained for the case of angular momentum
in steady-ﬂow systems. The resultant moment of all external forces
about some ﬁxed point O on or off the system, Fig. 4/5a, equals the time
rate of change of angular momentum of the system about O. This fact
was established in Eq. 4/7 which, for the case of steady ﬂow in a single
plane, becomes
ΣMO ϭ mЈ(v2 d2 Ϫ v1d1)

(4/19)

When the velocities of the incoming and outgoing ﬂows are not in the
same plane, the equation may be written in vector form as
ΣMO ϭ mЈ(d2 ؋ v2 Ϫ d1 ؋ v1)

(4/19a)

where d1 and d2 are the position vectors to the centers of A1 and A2
from the ﬁxed reference O. In both relations, the mass center G may be
used alternatively as a moment center by virtue of Eq. 4/9.
Equations 4/18 and 4/19a are very simple relations which ﬁnd important use in describing relatively complex ﬂuid actions. Note that
these equations relate external forces to the resultant changes in momentum and are independent of the ﬂow path and momentum changes
internal to the system.
The foregoing analysis may also be applied to systems which move
˙
with constant velocity by noting that the basic relations ΣF ϭ G and
˙
˙
ΣMO ϭ HO or ΣMG ϭ HG apply to systems moving with constant velocity as discussed in Arts. 3/12 and 4/4. The only restriction is that the
mass within the system remain constant with respect to time.
Three examples of the analysis of steady mass ﬂow are given in the
following sample problems, which illustrate the application of the principles embodied in Eqs. 4/18 and 4/19a.

© Robin Weaver/Alamy

290

The principles of steady mass flow are critical to
the design of this hovercraft.

Article 4/6

Steady Mass Flow

SAMPLE PROBLEM 4/6

y

The smooth vane shown diverts the open stream of ﬂuid of cross-sectional
area A, mass density ␳, and velocity v. (a) Determine the force components R and
F required to hold the vane in a ﬁxed position. (b) Find the forces when the vane
is given a constant velocity u less than v and in the direction of v.

⌬vx ϭ vЈ cos ␪ Ϫ v ϭ Ϫv(1 Ϫ cos ␪)

v′

θ

F

v

x

R

Solution. Part (a). The free-body diagram of the vane together with the ﬂuid
portion undergoing the momentum change is shown. The momentum equation
may be applied to the isolated system for the change in motion in both the x- and
y-directions. With the vane stationary, the magnitude of the exit velocity vЈ
equals that of the entering velocity v with ﬂuid friction neglected. The changes
in the velocity components are then

ᕡ

291

Fixed vane
y

v–u
θ

F

v

and

v–u

θ
u

v′

u

R
Moving vane

⌬vy ϭ vЈ sin ␪ Ϫ 0 ϭ v sin ␪
The mass rate of ﬂow is mЈ ϭ ␳Av, and substitution into Eq. 4/18 gives
[ΣFx ϭ mЈ⌬vx]

Helpful Hints
ϪF ϭ ␳Av[Ϫv(1 Ϫ cos ␪)]
F ϭ ␳Av2(1 Ϫ cos ␪)

[ΣFy ϭ mЈ⌬vy]

ᕡ Be careful with algebraic signs when
Ans.

R ϭ ␳Av[v sin ␪]
R ϭ ␳Av2 sin ␪

Ans.

using Eq. 4/18. The change in vx is
the ﬁnal value minus the initial
value measured in the positive xdirection. Also we must be careful to
write ϪF for ΣFx.

Part (b). In the case of the moving vane, the ﬁnal velocity vЈ of the ﬂuid upon
exit is the vector sum of the velocity u of the vane plus the velocity of the ﬂuid
relative to the vane v Ϫ u. This combination is shown in the velocity diagram to
the right of the ﬁgure for the exit conditions. The x-component of vЈ is the sum of
the components of its two parts, so vЈ ϭ (v Ϫ u) cos ␪ ϩ u. The change in x-velocity
x
of the stream is
⌬vx ϭ (v Ϫ u) cos ␪ ϩ (u Ϫ v) ϭ Ϫ(v Ϫ u)(1 Ϫ cos ␪)
The y-component of vЈ is (v Ϫ u) sin ␪, so that the change in the y-velocity of the
stream is ⌬vy ϭ (v Ϫ u) sin ␪.
The mass rate of ﬂow mЈ is the mass undergoing momentum change per
unit of time. This rate is the mass ﬂowing over the vane per unit time and not
the rate of issuance from the nozzle. Thus,
mЈ ϭ ␳A(v Ϫ u)
The impulse-momentum principle of Eq. 4/18 applied in the positive coordinate directions gives

ᕢ [ΣFx ϭ mЈ⌬vx]

F ϭ ␳A(v Ϫ u)2(1 Ϫ cos ␪)
[ΣFy ϭ mЈ⌬vy]

ᕢ Observe that for given values of u

ϪF ϭ ␳A(v Ϫ u)[Ϫ(v Ϫ u)( 1 Ϫ cos ␪)]

R ϭ ␳A(v Ϫ u)2 sin ␪

Ans.
Ans.

and v, the angle for maximum force
F is ␪ ϭ 180Њ.

x

292

Chapter 4

Kinetics of Systems of Particles

SAMPLE PROBLEM 4/7
For the moving vane of Sample Problem 4/6, determine the optimum speed
u of the vane for the generation of maximum power by the action of the ﬂuid on
the vane.

Solution. The force R shown with the ﬁgure for Sample Problem 4/6 is normal
to the velocity of the vane so it does no work. The work done by the force F
shown is negative, but the power developed by the force (reaction to F) exerted
by the ﬂuid on the moving vane is
[P ϭ Fu]

P ϭ ␳A(v Ϫ u)2u(1 Ϫ cos ␪)

Helpful Hint

The velocity of the vane for maximum power for the one blade in the stream is
speciﬁed by

ᕡ

΄dP ϭ 0΅
du

␳A(1 Ϫ cos ␪)(v2 Ϫ 4uv ϩ 3u2) ϭ 0
(v Ϫ 3u)(v Ϫ u) ϭ 0

uϭ

v
3

Ans.

The second solution u ϭ v gives a minimum condition of zero power. An angle
␪ ϭ 180Њ completely reverses the flow and clearly produces both maximum
force and maximum power for any value of u.

ᕡ The result here applies to a single
vane only. In the case of multiple
vanes, such as the blades on a turbine disk, the rate at which ﬂuid issues from the nozzles is the same
rate at which ﬂuid is undergoing
momentum change. Thus, mЈ ϭ ␳Av
rather than ␳A(v Ϫ u). With this
change, the optimum value of u
turns out to be u ϭ v/2.

SAMPLE PROBLEM 4/8
b

The offset nozzle has a discharge area A at B and an inlet area A0 at C. A
liquid enters the nozzle at a static gage pressure p through the ﬁxed pipe and issues from the nozzle with a velocity v in the direction shown. If the constant
density of the liquid is ␳, write expressions for the tension T, shear Q, and bending moment M in the pipe at C.

C

B θ
v a

Solution.

The free-body diagram of the nozzle and the ﬂuid within it shows
the tension T, shear Q, and bending moment M acting on the ﬂange of the nozzle
where it attaches to the ﬁxed pipe. The force pA0 on the ﬂuid within the nozzle
due to the static pressure is an additional external force.
Continuity of ﬂow with constant density requires that

y

Av ϭ A0v0

M

where v0 is the velocity of the ﬂuid at the entrance to the nozzle. The momentum
principle of Eq. 4/18 applied to the system in the two coordinate directions gives
[ΣFx ϭ mЈ⌬vx]

T ϭ pA0 ϩ ␳Av2

A
΂A Ϫ cos ␪΃

O

x

pA0

pA0 Ϫ T ϭ ␳Av(v cos ␪ Ϫ v0)

ᕡ

T

Q

Ans.

0

[ΣFy ϭ mЈ⌬vy]

ϪQ ϭ ␳Av(Ϫv sin ␪ Ϫ 0)
Q ϭ ␳Av2 sin ␪

Helpful Hints
Ans.

rect algebraic signs of the terms on
both sides of Eqs. 4/18 and 4/19.

The moment principle of Eq. 4/19 applied in the clockwise sense gives

ᕢ [ΣMO ϭ mЈ(v2 d2 Ϫ v1d1)]

M ϭ ␳Av(va cos ␪ ϩ vb sin ␪ Ϫ 0)
Mϭ

␳Av2(a

cos ␪ ϩ b sin ␪)

ᕡ Again, be careful to observe the cor-

ᕢ The forces and moment acting on
Ans.

the pipe are equal and opposite to
those shown acting on the nozzle.

Article 4/6

Steady Mass Flow

SAMPLE PROBLEM 4/9

293

y

An air-breathing jet aircraft of total mass m ﬂying with a constant speed v
consumes air at the mass rate mЈ and exhausts burned gas at the mass rate mЈ
a
g
with a velocity u relative to the aircraft. Fuel is consumed at the constant rate mЈ.
ƒ
The total aerodynamic forces acting on the aircraft are the lift L, normal to the direction of ﬂight, and the drag D, opposite to the direction of ﬂight. Any force due to
the static pressure across the inlet and exhaust surfaces is assumed to be included
in D. Write the equation for the motion of the aircraft and identify the thrust T.

mg
v
x
D

θ

L
y

Solution.

The free-body diagram of the aircraft together with the air, fuel,

mg

ᕡ and exhaust gas within it is given and shows only the weight, lift, and drag
forces as deﬁned. We attach axes x-y to the aircraft and apply our momentum

ᕢ equation relative to the moving system.

The fuel will be treated as a steady stream entering the aircraft with no velocity relative to the system and leaving with a relative velocity u in the exhaust
stream. We now apply Eq. 4/18 relative to the reference axes and treat the air and
fuel ﬂows separately. For the air ﬂow, the change in velocity in the x-direction
relative to the moving system is

ᕣ

m′ v
a

D
m′ u
g
L
mg

⌬va ϭ Ϫu Ϫ (Ϫv) ϭ Ϫ(u Ϫ v)
and for the fuel ﬂow the x-change in velocity relative to x-y is

D
T

⌬vƒ ϭ Ϫu Ϫ (0) ϭ Ϫu

L

Thus, we have
[ΣFx ϭ mЈ⌬vx]

Ϫmg sin ␪ Ϫ D ϭ ϪmЈ(u Ϫ v) Ϫ mЈu
a
ƒ
Helpful Hints

ϭ ϪmЈu ϩ mЈv
g
a

ᕡ Note that the boundary of the sys-

where the substitution mЈ ϭ mЈ ϩ mЈ has been made. Changing signs gives
g
a
ƒ

tem cuts across the air stream at the
entrance to the air scoop and across
the exhaust stream at the nozzle.

mЈu Ϫ mЈv ϭ mg sin ␪ ϩ D
g
a
which is the equation of motion of the system.
If we modify the boundaries of our system to expose the interior surfaces on
which the air and gas act, we will have the simulated model shown, where the air
exerts a force mЈv on the interior of the turbine and the exhaust gas reacts
a
against the interior surfaces with the force mЈu.
g
The commonly used model is shown in the ﬁnal diagram, where the net effect of air and exhaust momentum changes is replaced by a simulated thrust

ᕤ

T ϭ mЈu Ϫ mЈv
g
a

Ans.

applied to the aircraft from a presumed external source.
Inasmuch as mЈ is generally only 2 percent or less of mЈ, we can use the apƒ
a
proximation mЈ ഡ mЈ and express the thrust as
g
a
T ഡ mЈ(u Ϫ v)
g

Ans.

We have analyzed the case of constant velocity. Although our Newtonian
principles do not generally hold relative to accelerating axes, it can be shown
that we may use the F ϭ ma equation for the simulated model and write T Ϫ
mg sin ␪ Ϫ D ϭ mv with virtually no error.
˙

ᕢ We are permitted to use moving
axes which translate with constant
velocity. See Arts. 3/14 and 4/2.

ᕣ Riding with the aircraft, we observe the air entering our system
with a velocity Ϫv measured in the
plus x-direction and leaving the
system with an x-velocity of Ϫu.
The final value minus the initial
one gives the expression cited,
namely, Ϫu Ϫ (Ϫv) ϭ Ϫ(u Ϫ v).

ᕤ We now see that the “thrust” is, in
reality, not a force external to the
entire airplane shown in the ﬁrst ﬁgure but can be modeled as an external force.

x

294

Chapter 4

Kinetics of Systems of Particles

PROBLEMS
Introductory Problems
4/35 The jet aircraft has a mass of 4.6 Mg and a drag (air
resistance) of 32 kN at a speed of 1000 km/h at a
particular altitude. The aircraft consumes air at the
rate of 106 kg/s through its intake scoop and uses
fuel at the rate of 4 kg/s. If the exhaust has a rearward velocity of 680 m/s relative to the exhaust nozzle, determine the maximum angle of elevation ␣ at
which the jet can ﬂy with a constant speed of 1000
km/h at the particular altitude in question.

4/37 Fresh water issues from the nozzle with a velocity of
30 m/s at the rate of 0.05 m3/s and is split into two
equal streams by the ﬁxed vane and deﬂected
through 60Њ as shown. Calculate the force F required
to hold the vane in place. The density of water is
1000 kg/m3.
60°

A
F

α

60°
Problem 4/35

4/36 A jet of air issues from the nozzle with a velocity of
300 ft/sec at the rate of 6.50 ft3/sec and is deﬂected
by the right-angle vane. Calculate the force F required to hold the vane in a ﬁxed position. The speciﬁc weight of the air is 0.0753 lb/ft3.
y

Problem 4/37

4/38 The jet water ski has reached its maximum velocity
of 70 km/h when operating in salt water. The water
intake is in the horizontal tunnel in the bottom of
the hull, so the water enters the intake at the velocity of 70 km/h relative to the ski. The motorized
pump discharges water from the horizontal exhaust
nozzle of 50-mm diameter at the rate of 0.082 m3/s.
Calculate the resistance R of the water to the hull at
the operating speed.

x

F
v

Problem 4/36

Problem 4/38

Article 4/6
4/39 The ﬁre tug discharges a stream of salt water (density 1030 kg/m3) with a nozzle velocity of 40 m/s at
the rate of 0.080 m3/s. Calculate the propeller thrust
T which must be developed by the tug to maintain a
ﬁxed position while pumping.

Problems

295

4/42 The 90Њ vane moves to the left with a constant velocity of 10 m/s against a stream of fresh water issuing
with a velocity of 20 m/s from the 25-mm-diameter
nozzle. Calculate the forces Fx and Fy on the vane
required to support the motion.
y

30°

20 m/s
x

Fx
10 m/s
Fy

Problem 4/39

4/40 The ﬁgure shows the top view of an experimental
rocket sled which is traveling at a speed of 1000 ft/sec
when its forward scoop enters a water channel to act
as a brake. The water is diverted at right angles relative to the motion of the sled. If the frontal ﬂow area
of the scoop is 15 in.2, calculate the initial braking
force. The speciﬁc weight of water is 62.4 lb/ft3.

Rails

v
Scoop
Water channel

Problem 4/40

Problem 4/42

Representative Problems
4/43 A jet of ﬂuid with cross-sectional area A and mass
density ␳ issues from the nozzle with a velocity v and
impinges on the inclined trough shown in section.
Some of the ﬂuid is diverted in each of the two directions. If the trough is smooth, the velocity of both diverted streams remains v, and the only force which
can be exerted on the trough is normal to the bottom
surface. Hence, the trough will be held in position by
forces whose resultant is F normal to the trough. By
writing impulse-momentum equations for the directions along and normal to the trough, determine the
force F required to support the trough. Also ﬁnd the
volume rates of ﬂow Q1 and Q2 for the two streams.
1

4/41 A jet-engine noise suppressor consists of a movable
duct which is secured directly behind the jet exhaust
by cable A and deﬂects the blast directly upward.
During a ground test, the engine sucks in air at the
rate of 43 kg/s and burns fuel at the rate of 0.8 kg/s.
The exhaust velocity is 720 m/s. Determine the tension T in the cable.

θ
v
F

A

15°

Problem 4/41

2
Problem 4/43

296

Chapter 4

Kinetics of Systems of Particles

4/44 The 8-oz ball is supported by the vertical stream of
fresh water which issues from the 1/2-in.-diameter
nozzle with a velocity of 35 ft/sec. Calculate the
height h of the ball above the nozzle. Assume that
the stream remains intact and there is no energy
lost in the jet stream.
1
— lb
2

4/46 Salt water is being discharged into the atmosphere
from the two 30° outlets at the total rate of
30 m3 /min. Each of the discharge nozzles has a ﬂow
diameter of 100 mm, and the inside diameter of the
pipe at the connecting section A is 250 mm. The
pressure of the water at section A-A is 550 kPa. If
each of the six bolts at the ﬂange A-A is tightened to
a tension of 10 kN, calculate the average pressure p
on the ﬂange gasket, which has an area of
24(103) mm2. The pipe above the ﬂange and the
water within it have a mass of 60 kg.

30°

30°

h

A

A

Problem 4/44
Problem 4/46

4/45 A jet-engine thrust reverser to reduce an aircraft
speed of 200 km/h after landing employs folding
vanes which deﬂect the exhaust gases in the direction indicated. If the engine is consuming 50 kg of
air and 0.65 kg of fuel per second, calculate the braking thrust as a fraction n of the engine thrust without the deﬂector vanes. The exhaust gases have a
velocity of 650 m/s relative to the nozzle.
30°

4/47 The axial-ﬂow fan C pumps air through the duct of
circular cross section and exhausts it with a velocity v
at B. The air densities at A and B are ␳A and ␳B,
respectively, and the corresponding pressures are pA
and pB. The ﬁxed deﬂecting blades at D restore axial
ﬂow to the air after it passes through the propeller
blades C. Write an expression for the resultant horizontal force R exerted on the fan unit by the ﬂange
and bolts at A.

Dia.
=d

C

200 km/h

D

B

A
Problem 4/47

30°
Problem 4/45

Dia.
=d

E

Article 4/6
4/48 Air is pumped through the stationary duct A with a
velocity of 50 ft/sec and exhausted through an experimental nozzle section BC. The average static pressure across section B is 150 lb/in.2 gage, and the
speciﬁc weight of air at this pressure and at the temperature prevailing is 0.840 lb/ft3. The average static
pressure across the exit section C is measured to be
2 lb/in.2 gage, and the corresponding speciﬁc weight
of air is 0.0760 lb/ft3. Calculate the force T exerted
on the nozzle ﬂange at B by the bolts and the gasket
to hold the nozzle in place.

Problems

297

4/50 The sump pump has a net mass of 310 kg and
pumps fresh water against a 6-m head at the rate of
0.125 m3/s. Determine the vertical force R between
the supporting base and the pump ﬂange at A during
operation. The mass of water in the pump may be
taken as the equivalent of a 200-mm-diameter column 6 m in height.

100 mm
45°

B

A

A

C
8″

50

4″

ft/sec

6m
200 mm

Problem 4/48

4/49 One of the most advanced methods for cutting metal
plates uses a high-velocity water jet which carries an
abrasive garnet powder. The jet issues from the
0.01-in.-diameter nozzle at A and follows the path
shown through the thickness t of the plate. As the
plate is slowly moved to the right, the jet makes a narrow precision slot in the plate. The water-abrasive
mixture is used at the low rate of 1/2 gal/min and
has a speciﬁc weight of 68 lb/ft3. Water issues from
the bottom of the plate with a velocity which is 60
percent of the impinging nozzle velocity. Calculate
the horizontal force F required to hold the plate
against the jet. (There are 231 in.3 in 1 gal.)

250
mm
Problem 4/50

4/51 In a test of the operation of a “cherry-picker” ﬁre
truck, the equipment is free to roll with its brakes
released. For the position shown, the truck is observed to deﬂect the spring of stiffness k ϭ 15 kN/m
a distance of 150 mm because of the action of the
horizontal stream of water issuing from the nozzle
when the pump is activated. If the exit diameter of
the nozzle is 30 mm, calculate the velocity v of the
stream as it leaves the nozzle. Also determine the
added moment M which the joint at A must resist
when the pump is in operation with the nozzle in the
position shown.

30°
4.8 m

Nozzle
v

A

90°
t

F

15 m
45°
75°

Problem 4/49

Problem 4/51

A

298

Chapter 4

Kinetics of Systems of Particles

4/52 The experimental ground-effect machine has a total
weight of 4200 lb. It hovers 1 or 2 ft off the ground by
pumping air at atmospheric pressure through the circular intake duct at B and discharging it horizontally
under the periphery of the skirt C. For an intake
velocity v of 150 ft/sec, calculate the average air pressure p under the 18-ft-diameter machine at ground
level. The speciﬁc weight of the air is 0.076 lb/ft3.

d
u
A

3′
v
B
B
C

B

v

v

θ

θ

9′
Problem 4/54
Problem 4/52

4/53 A commercial aircraft ﬂying horizontally at 500 mi/hr
encounters a heavy downpour of rain falling vertically
at the rate of 20 ft/sec with an intensity equivalent to
an accumulation of 1 in./hr on the ground. The upper
surface area of the aircraft projected onto the horizontal plane is 2960 ft2. Calculate the negligible downward force F of the rain on the aircraft.

4/55 The 180Њ return pipe discharges salt water (speciﬁc
weight 64.4 lb/ft3) into the atmosphere at a constant
rate of 1.6 ft3/sec. The static pressure in the water at
section A is 10 lb/in.2 above atmospheric pressure.
The ﬂow area of the pipe at A is 20 in.2 and that at
each of the two outlets is 3.2 in.2 If each of the six
ﬂange bolts is tightened with a torque wrench so
that it is under a tension of 150 lb, determine the average pressure p on the gasket between the two
ﬂanges. The ﬂange area in contact with the gasket is
16 in.2 Also determine the bending moment M in the
pipe at section A if the left-hand discharge is blocked
off and the ﬂow rate is cut in half. Neglect the
weight of the pipe and the water within it.

500 mi/hr
A
Problem 4/53

4/54 The ducted fan unit of mass m is supported in the
vertical position on its ﬂange at A. The unit draws in
air with a density ␳ and a velocity u through section
A and discharges it through section B with a velocity v.
Both inlet and outlet pressures are atmospheric.
Write an expression for the force R applied to the
ﬂange of the fan unit by the supporting slab.

8″

Problem 4/55

Article 4/6
4/56 The ﬁre hydrant is tested under a high standpipe
pressure. The total ﬂow of 10 ft3/sec is divided
equally between the two outlets, each of which has a
cross-sectional area of 0.040 ft2. The inlet crosssectional area at the base is 0.75 ft2. Neglect the
weight of the hydrant and water within it and compute the tension T, the shear V, and the bending moment M in the base of the standpipe at B. The speciﬁc
weight of water is 62.4 lb/ft3. The static pressure of
the water as it enters the base at B is 120 lb/in.2

Problems

299

4/58 The industrial blower sucks in air through the axial
opening A with a velocity v1 and discharges it at
atmospheric pressure and temperature through
the 150-mm-diameter duct B with a velocity v2. The
blower handles 16 m3 of air per minute with the
motor and fan running at 3450 rev/min. If the motor
requires 0.32 kW of power under no load (both ducts
closed), calculate the power P consumed while air is
being pumped.

y
20″
A
v1
200 mm

x

30°

B
v2

30″

24″
Problem 4/58
B

Problem 4/56

4/57 A rotary snow plow mounted on a large truck eats
its way through a snow drift on a level road at a constant speed of 20 km/h. The plow discharges 60 Mg
of snow per minute from its 45Њ chute with a velocity
of 12 m/s relative to the plow. Calculate the tractive
force P on the tires in the direction of motion necessary to move the plow and ﬁnd the corresponding
lateral force R between the tires and the road.

4/59 The feasibility of a one-passenger VTOL (vertical
takeoff and landing) craft is under review. The preliminary design calls for a small engine with a high
power-to-weight ratio driving an air pump that draws
in air through the 70Њ ducts with an inlet velocity
v ϭ 40 m/s at a static gage pressure of Ϫ1.8 kPa
across the inlet areas totaling 0.1320 m2. The air is
exhausted vertically down with a velocity u ϭ 420 m/s.
For a 90-kg passenger, calculate the maximum net
mass m of the machine for which it can take off and
hover. (See Table D/1 for air density.)

z
v

v
70°

70°
45°
y
u
Problem 4/59
x

Problem 4/57

300

Chapter 4

Kinetics of Systems of Particles

4/60 The military jet aircraft has a gross weight of 24,000
lb and is poised for takeoff with brakes set while the
engine is revved up to maximum power. At this condition, air with a speciﬁc weight of 0.0753 lb/ft3 is
sucked into the intake ducts at the rate of 106 lb/sec
with a static pressure of Ϫ0.30 lb/in.2 (gage) across
the duct entrance. The total cross-sectional area of
both intake ducts (one on each side) is 1800 in.2 The
air–fuel ratio is 18, and the exhaust velocity u is
3100 ft/sec with zero back pressure (gage) across the
exhaust nozzle. Compute the initial acceleration a of
the aircraft upon release of the brakes.

4/62 The VTOL (vertical takeoff and landing) military
aircraft is capable of rising vertically under the action of its jet exhaust, which can be “vectored” from
␪ ഡ 0 for takeoff and hovering to ␪ ϭ 90Њ for forward
ﬂight. The loaded aircraft has a mass of 8600 kg. At
full takeoff power, its turbo-fan engine consumes air
at the rate of 90 kg/s and has an air–fuel ratio of 18.
Exhaust-gas velocity is 1020 m/s with essentially atmospheric pressure across the exhaust nozzles. Air
with a density of 1.206 kg/m3 is sucked into the intake scoops at a pressure of Ϫ2 kPa (gage) over the
total inlet area of 1.10 m2. Determine the angle ␪ for
vertical takeoff and the corresponding vertical acceleration ay of the aircraft.

u

v0

y

Problem 4/60
v0

4/61 The helicopter shown has a mass m and hovers in
position by imparting downward momentum to a
column of air deﬁned by the slipstream boundary
shown. Find the downward velocity v given to the air
by the rotor at a section in the stream below the
rotor, where the pressure is atmospheric and the
stream radius is r. Also ﬁnd the power P required of
the engine. Neglect the rotational energy of the air,
any temperature rise due to air friction, and any
change in air density ␳.

u

θ
Problem 4/62

4/63 A marine terminal for unloading bulk wheat from a
ship is equipped with a vertical pipe with a nozzle at A
which sucks wheat up the pipe and transfers it to the
storage building. Calculate the x- and y-components of
the force R required to change the momentum of the
ﬂowing mass in rounding the bend. Identify all forces
applied externally to the bend and mass within it. Air
ﬂows through the 14-in.-diameter pipe at the rate of
18 tons per hour under a vacuum of 9 in. of mercury
( p ϭ Ϫ4.42 lb/in.2) and carries with it 150 tons of
wheat per hour at a speed of 124 ft/sec.

B
v

r

C
60°
y

Problem 4/61
x

A

Problem 4/63

Article 4/6
4/64 The sprinkler is made to rotate at the constant angular velocity ␻ and distributes water at the volume
rate Q. Each of the four nozzles has an exit area A.
Write an expression for the torque M on the shaft of
the sprinkler necessary to maintain the given motion. For a given pressure and, thus, ﬂow rate Q, at
what speed ␻0 will the sprinkler operate with no
applied torque? Let ␳ be the density of the water.
ω

Problems

᭤ 4/66 An axial section of the suction nozzle A for a bulk
wheat unloader is shown here. The outer pipe is secured to the inner pipe by several longitudinal webs
which do not restrict the ﬂow of air. A vacuum of
9 in. of mercury ( p ϭ Ϫ4.42 lb/in.2 gage) is maintained in the inner pipe, and the pressure across the
bottom of the outer pipe is atmospheric ( p ϭ 0). Air
at 0.075 lb/ft3 is drawn in through the space between
the pipes at a rate of 18 tons/hr at atmospheric pressure and draws with it 150 tons of wheat per hour
up the pipe at a velocity of 124 ft/sec. If the nozzle
unit below section A-A weighs 60 lb, calculate the
compression C in the connection at A-A.

r
15″
b
14″
M
A

A

Air

Problem 4/64

Air

4/65 A high-speed jet of air issues from the 40-mm-diameter
nozzle A with a velocity v of 240 m/s and impinges
on the vane OB, shown in its edge view. The vane
and its right-angle extension have negligible mass
compared with the attached 6-kg cylinder and are
freely pivoted about a horizontal axis through O.
Calculate the angle ␪ assumed by the vane with the
horizontal. The air density under the prevailing conditions is 1.206 kg/m3. State any assumptions.
16.5″
Problem 4/66
6 kg

240 mm

θ

O

v
A
B

v

Problem 4/65

120 mm

301

302

Chapter 4

Kinetics of Systems of Particles

᭤4/67 In the ﬁgure is shown an impulse-turbine wheel for
a hydroelectric power plant which is to operate with
a static head of water of 300 m at each of its six nozzles and is to rotate at the speed of 270 rev /min.
Each wheel and generator unit is to develop an output power of 22 000 kW. The efﬁciency of the generator may be taken to be 0.90, and an efﬁciency of
0.85 for the conversion of the kinetic energy of the
water jets to energy delivered by the turbine may be
expected. The mean peripheral speed of such a wheel
for greatest efﬁciency will be about 0.47 times the jet
velocity. If each of the buckets is to have the shape
shown, determine the necessary jet diameter d and
wheel diameter D. Assume that the water acts on
the bucket which is at the tangent point of each jet
stream.

᭤4/68 A test vehicle designed for impact studies has a mass
m ϭ 1.4 Mg and is accelerated from rest by the
impingement of a high-velocity water jet upon its
curved deﬂector attached to the rear of the vehicle.
The jet of fresh water is produced by the air-operated
piston and issues from the 140-mm-diameter nozzle
with a velocity v ϭ 150 m/s. Frictional resistance of
the vehicle, treated as a particle, amounts to 10 percent of its weight. Determine the velocity u of the
vehicle 3 seconds after release from rest. (Hint:
Adapt the results of Sample Problem 4/6.)
To air supply

60°

Problem 4/68

D

u

10

°

v

10
°

Bucket detail
Problem 4/67

u

v
m

Article 4/7

4/7

Variable Mass

In Art. 4/4 we extended the equations for the motion of a particle to
include a system of particles. This extension led to the very general ex˙
˙
˙
pressions ΣF ϭ G, ΣMO ϭ HO, and ΣMG ϭ HG, which are Eqs. 4/6, 4/7,
and 4/9, respectively. In their derivation, the summations were taken
over a ﬁxed collection of particles, so that the mass of the system to be
analyzed was constant.
In Art. 4/6 these momentum principles were extended in Eqs. 4/18
and 4/19a to describe the action of forces on a system deﬁned by a geometric volume through which passes a steady ﬂow of mass. Therefore,
the amount of mass within this volume was constant with respect to
time and thus we were able to use Eqs. 4/6, 4/7, and 4/9. When the mass
within the boundary of a system under consideration is not constant,
the foregoing relationships are no longer valid.*

Equation of Motion
We will now develop the equation for the linear motion of a system
whose mass varies with time. Consider ﬁrst a body which gains mass by
overtaking and swallowing a stream of matter, Fig. 4/6a. The mass of
the body and its velocity at any instant are m and v, respectively. The
stream of matter is assumed to be moving in the same direction as m
with a constant velocity v0 less than v. By virtue of Eq. 4/18, the force
exerted by m on the particles of the stream to accelerate them from a velocity v0 to a greater velocity v is R ϭ mЈ(v Ϫ v0) ϭ mu, where the time
˙
rate of increase of m is mЈ ϭ m and where u is the magnitude of the rel˙
ative velocity with which the particles approach m. In addition to R, all
other forces acting on m in the direction of its motion are denoted by
v

v0

ΣF

R
m
v

m swallows mass (v > v0)
(a)
v0

ΣF

R
m
(b)

m expels mass (v > v0)

v

v0

ΣF
m
(c)

m0
m expels mass (v > v0)

Figure 4/6
*In relativistic mechanics the mass is found to be a function of velocity, and its time derivative has a meaning different from that in Newtonian mechanics.

Variable Mass

303

304

Chapter 4

Kinetics of Systems of Particles

ΣF. The equation of motion of m from Newton’s second law is, therefore, ΣF Ϫ R ϭ mv or
˙
ΣF ϭ mv ϩ mu
˙ ˙

(4/20)

Similarly, if the body loses mass by expelling it rearward so that its
velocity v0 is less than v, Fig. 4/6b, the force R required to decelerate the
particles from a velocity v to a lesser velocity v0 is R ϭ mЈ(Ϫv0 Ϫ [Ϫv]) ϭ
mЈ(v Ϫ v0). But mЈ ϭ Ϫm since m is decreasing. Also, the relative veloc˙
ity with which the particles leave m is u ϭ v Ϫ v0. Thus, the force R becomes R ϭ Ϫmu. If ΣF denotes the resultant of all other forces acting
˙
on m in the direction of its motion, Newton’s second law requires that
ΣF ϩ R ϭ mv or
˙
ΣF ϭ mv ϩ mu
˙ ˙

© Patrick Forget/AgeFotostock America, Inc.

which is the same relationship as in the case where m is gaining mass.
We may use Eq. 4/20, therefore, as the equation of motion of m, whether
it is gaining or losing mass.
A frequent error in the use of the force-momentum equation is to
express the partial force sum ⌺F as

ΣF ϭ

The Super Scooper is a ﬁreﬁghting
airplane which can quickly ingest water
from a lake by skimming across the
surface with just a bottom-mounted
scoop entering the water. The mass
within the aircraft boundary varies during
the scooping operation as well as during
the dumping operation shown.

d
(mv) ϭ mv ϩ mv
˙ ˙
dt

From this expansion we see that the direct differentiation of the linear
momentum gives the correct force ΣF only when the body picks up mass
initially at rest or when it expels mass which is left with zero absolute
velocity. In both instances, v0 ϭ 0 and u ϭ v.

Alternative Approach
We may also obtain Eq. 4/20 by a direct differentiation of the mo˙
mentum from the basic relation ΣF ϭ G, provided a proper system of
constant total mass is chosen. To illustrate this approach, we take the
case where m is losing mass and use Fig. 4/6c, which shows the system
of m and an arbitrary portion m0 of the stream of ejected mass. The
mass of this system is m ϩ m0 and is constant.
The ejected stream of mass is assumed to move undisturbed once
separated from m, and the only force external to the entire system is ΣF
which is applied directly to m as before. The reaction R ϭ Ϫmu is inter˙
nal to the system and is not disclosed as an external force on the system.
˙
With constant total mass, the momentum principle ΣF ϭ G is applicable
and we have
ΣF ϭ

d
(mv ϩ m0v0) ϭ mv ϩ mv ϩ m0v0 ϩ m0˙0
v
˙ ˙
˙
dt

Article 4/7

Variable Mass

305

Clearly, m0 ϭ Ϫm, and the velocity of the ejected mass with respect
˙
˙
v
to m is u ϭ v Ϫ v0. Also ˙0 ϭ 0 since m0 moves undisturbed with no acceleration once free of m. Thus, the relation becomes
ΣF ϭ mv ϩ mu
˙ ˙
which is identical to the result of the previous formulation, Eq. 4/20.

Application to Rocket Propulsion
The case of m losing mass is clearly descriptive of rocket propulsion.
Figure 4/7a shows a vertically ascending rocket, the system for which is
the mass within the volume deﬁned by the exterior surface of the rocket
and the exit plane across the nozzle. External to this system, the freebody diagram discloses the instantaneous values of gravitational attraction mg, aerodynamic resistance R, and the force pA due to the average
static pressure p across the nozzle exit plane of area A. The rate of mass
ﬂow is mЈ ϭ Ϫm. Thus, we may write the equation of motion of the
˙
rocket, ΣF ϭ mv ϩ mu, as pA Ϫ mg Ϫ R ϭ mv ϩ mu, or
˙ ˙
˙ ˙
mЈu ϩ pA Ϫ mg Ϫ R ϭ mv
˙

(4/21)

Equation 4/21 is of the form “ΣF ϭ ma” where the ﬁrst term in
“ΣF” is the thrust T ϭ mЈu. Thus, the rocket may be simulated as a
body to which an external thrust T is applied, Fig. 4/7b, and the problem
may then be analyzed like any other F ϭ ma problem, except that m is a
function of time.
Observe that, during the initial stages of motion when the magnitude of the velocity v of the rocket is less than the relative exhaust velocity u, the absolute velocity v0 of the exhaust gases will be directed
rearward. On the other hand, when the rocket reaches a velocity v whose
magnitude is greater than u, the absolute velocity v0 of the exhaust gases
will be directed forward. For a given mass rate of ﬂow, the rocket thrust
T depends only on the relative exhaust velocity u and not on the magnitude or on the direction of the absolute velocity v0 of the exhaust gases.
In the foregoing treatment of bodies whose mass changes with time,
we have assumed that all elements of the mass m of the body were moving with the same velocity v at any instant of time and that the particles
of mass added to or expelled from the body underwent an abrupt transition of velocity upon entering or leaving the body. Thus, this velocity
change has been modeled as a mathematical discontinuity. In reality,
this change in velocity cannot be discontinuous even though the transition may be rapid. In the case of a rocket, for example, the velocity
change occurs continuously in the space between the combustion zone
and the exit plane of the exhaust nozzle. A more general analysis* of
variable-mass dynamics removes this restriction of discontinuous velocity change and introduces a slight correction to Eq. 4/20.
*For a development of the equations which describe the general motion of a time-dependent
system of mass, see Art. 53 of the ﬁrst author’s Dynamics, 2nd Edition, SI Version, 1975,
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

R

R

mg

mg

pA

pA
T = m′u

Actual
system

Simulated
system

(a)

(b)

Figure 4/7

306

Chapter 4

Kinetics of Systems of Particles

SAMPLE PROBLEM 4/10

P

The end of a chain of length L and mass ␳ per unit length which is piled on a
platform is lifted vertically with a constant velocity v by a variable force P. Find
P as a function of the height x of the end above the platform. Also ﬁnd the energy lost during the lifting of the chain.
x

Solution I (Variable-Mass Approach).

Equation 4/20 will be used and
applied to the moving part of the chain of length x which is gaining mass. The
force summation ΣF includes all forces acting on the moving part except the
force exerted by the particles which are being attached. From the diagram we
have
Helpful Hints

ΣFx ϭ P Ϫ ␳gx
The velocity is constant so that ˙ ϭ 0. The rate of increase of mass is m ϭ ␳v,
v
˙
and the relative velocity with which the attaching particles approach the moving
part is u ϭ v Ϫ 0 ϭ v. Thus, Eq. 4/20 becomes

ᕡ [ΣF ϭ mv ϩ mu]
˙ ˙

P Ϫ ␳gx ϭ 0 ϩ ␳v(v)

P ϭ ␳(gx ϩ v2)

Ans.

ᕡ The model of Fig. 4/6a shows the
mass being added to the leading end
of the moving part. With the chain
the mass is added to the trailing
end, but the effect is the same.

We now see that the force P consists of the two parts, ␳gx, which is the weight of
the moving part of the chain, and ␳v2, which is the added force required to
change the momentum of the links on the platform from a condition at rest to a
velocity v.

P

Solution
I

Solution II (Constant-Mass Approach).

The principle of impulse and
momentum for a system of particles expressed by Eq. 4/6 will be applied to the
entire chain considered as the system of constant mass. The free-body diagram
of the system shows the unknown force P, the total weight of all links ␳gL, and
the force ␳g(L Ϫ x) exerted by the platform on those links which are at rest on it.
The momentum of the system at any position is Gx ϭ ␳xv and the momentum
equation gives

ᕢ

΄ΣF ϭ dt ΅
dGx

x

P ϩ ␳g(L Ϫ x) Ϫ ␳gL ϭ

d
(␳xv)
dt

P ϭ ␳(gx ϩ v2)

Ans.

Again the force P is seen to be equal to the weight of the portion of the
chain which is off the platform plus the added term which accounts for the time
rate of increase of momentum of the chain.

Energy Loss. Each link on the platform acquires its velocity abruptly through
an impact with the link above it, which lifts it off the platform. The succession of
impacts gives rise to an energy loss ⌬E (negative work Ϫ⌬E) so that the work-

ᕣ energy equation becomes UЈ ϭ
1-2

͵ P dx ϭ ͵

͵ P dx Ϫ ⌬E ϭ ⌬T ϩ ⌬V , where

L

0

g

1

⌬Vg ϭ ␳gL

L 1
ϭ ␳gL2
2 2

Substituting into the work-energy equation gives
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
2 ␳gL ϩ ␳v L Ϫ ⌬E ϭ 2 ␳Lv ϩ 2 ␳gL

⌬E ϭ 1 ␳Lv2
2

Solution
II

ρ gL

ρ g(L – x)

ᕢ We must be very careful not to use
˙
ΣF ϭ G for a system whose mass is
changing. Thus, we have taken the
total chain as the system since its
mass is constant.

ᕣ Note that UЈ includes work done
1-2
by internal nonelastic forces, such as
the link-to-link impact forces, where
this work is converted into heat and
acoustical energy loss ⌬E.

( ␳gx ϩ ␳v2) dx ϭ 2 ␳gL2 ϩ ␳v2L

⌬T ϭ 1 ␳Lv2
2

ρ gx

P

Ans.

Article 4/7

SAMPLE PROBLEM 4/11

Variable Mass

P

P

307

P

Replace the open-link chain of Sample Problem 4/10 by a ﬂexible but inextensible rope or bicycle-type chain of length L and mass ␳ per unit length. Determine the force P required to elevate the end of the rope with a constant velocity
v and determine the corresponding reaction R between the coil and the platform.
ρ gL

Solution.

The free-body diagram of the coil and moving portion of the rope is
shown in the left-hand ﬁgure. Because of some resistance to bending and some
ᕡ lateral motion, the transition from rest to vertical velocity v will occur over an
appreciable segment of the rope. Nevertheless, assume ﬁrst that all moving elements have the same velocity so that Eq. 4/6 for the system gives

ᕢ

΄ΣF ϭ dt ΅
dGx

x

d
(␳xv)
dt

P ϩ R Ϫ ␳gL ϭ

P ϩ R ϭ ␳v2 ϩ ␳gL

ρ gL
x

T0
R

R

We assume further that all elements of the coil of rope are at rest on the platform and transmit no force to the platform other than their weight, so that R ϭ
␳g(L Ϫ x). Substitution into the foregoing relation gives
P ϩ ␳g(L Ϫ x) ϭ ␳v2 ϩ ␳gL

which is the same result as that for the chain in Sample Problem 4/10.
The total work done on the rope by P becomes
UЈ ϭ
1-2

͵ P dx ϭ ͵

x

0

( ␳v2 ϩ ␳gx) dx ϭ ␳v2x ϩ 1 ␳gx2
2

Substitution into the work-energy equation gives
[UЈ ϭ ⌬T ϩ ⌬Vg]
1-2

␳v2x ϩ 1 ␳gx2 ϭ ⌬T ϩ ␳gx
2

x
2

⌬T ϭ ␳xv2

ᕣ which is twice the kinetic energy 1 ␳xv2 of vertical motion. Thus, an equal
2

amount of kinetic energy is unaccounted for. This conclusion largely negates our
assumption of one-dimensional x-motion.
In order to produce a one-dimensional model which retains the inextensibility
property assigned to the rope, it is necessary to impose a physical constraint at the
base to guide the rope into vertical motion and at the same time preserve a smooth
ᕤ transition from rest to upward velocity v without energy loss. Such a guide is included in the free-body diagram of the entire rope in the middle ﬁgure and is represented schematically in the middle free-body diagram of the right-hand ﬁgure.
For a conservative system, the work-energy equation gives

ᕥ [dUЈ ϭ dT ϩ dVg]

1

΂

P dx ϭ d(2␳xv2) ϩ d ␳gx

x
2

΃

P ϭ 1 ␳v2 ϩ ␳gx
2

˙
Substitution into the impulse-momentum equation ΣFx ϭ Gx gives
1 2
2
2 ␳v ϩ ␳gx ϩ R Ϫ ␳gL ϭ ␳v

T0

ρ g(L – x)

P ϭ ␳v2 ϩ ␳gx

or

1

R ϭ 2 ␳v2 ϩ ␳g(L Ϫ x)

Because it requires a force of ␳v 2 to change the momentum of the rope elements,
the restraining guide must supply the balance F ϭ 1 ␳v2 which, in turn, is trans2
mitted to the platform.

F

R

Helpful Hints

ᕡ Perfect ﬂexibility would not permit
any resistance to bending.

ᕢ Remember that v is constant and
equals ˙. Also note that this same
x
relation applies to the chain of Sample Problem 4/10.

ᕣ This added term of unaccounted-for
kinetic energy exactly equals the energy lost by the chain during the impact of its links.

ᕤ This restraining guide may be visualized as a canister of negligible
mass rotating within the coil with
an angular velocity v/r and connected to the platform through its
shaft. As it turns, it feeds the rope
from a rest position to an upward
velocity v, as indicated in the accompanying ﬁgure.

ᕥ Note that the mass center of the section of length x is a distance x/2 above
the base.

Although this force, which exceeds the weight by 1 ␳v2, is unrealistic experimen2
tally, it would be present in the idealized model.
Equilibrium of the vertical section requires
T0 ϭ P Ϫ ␳gx ϭ 1 ␳v2 ϩ ␳gx Ϫ ␳gx ϭ 1 ␳v2
2
2

ρ gx

v

ω = v/r

r

308

Chapter 4

Kinetics of Systems of Particles

SAMPLE PROBLEM 4/12
A rocket of initial total mass m0 is ﬁred vertically up from the north pole
and accelerates until the fuel, which burns at a constant rate, is exhausted. The
relative nozzle velocity of the exhaust gas has a constant value u, and the nozzle
exhausts at atmospheric pressure throughout the ﬂight. If the residual mass of
the rocket structure and machinery is mb when burnout occurs, determine the
expression for the maximum velocity reached by the rocket. Neglect atmospheric
resistance and the variation of gravity with altitude.

v
mg

Solution I (F ϭ ma Solution).

We adopt the approach illustrated with Fig.
4/7b and treat the thrust as an external force on the rocket. With the neglect of
ᕡ the back pressure p across the nozzle and the atmospheric resistance R, Eq. 4/21
or Newton’s second law gives

Helpful Hints

ᕡ The neglect of atmospheric resis-

T Ϫ mg ϭ mv
˙

tance is not a bad assumption for a
ﬁrst approximation inasmuch as the
velocity of the ascending rocket is
smallest in the dense part of the atmosphere and greatest in the rareﬁed region. Also for an altitude of
320 km, the acceleration due to
gravity is 91 percent of the value at
the surface of the earth.

But the thrust is T ϭ mЈu ϭ Ϫmu so that the equation of motion becomes
˙
Ϫmu Ϫ mg ϭ mv
˙
˙
Multiplication by dt, division by m, and rearrangement give
dm
Ϫ g dt
m

dv ϭ Ϫu

T

which is now in a form which can be integrated. The velocity v corresponding to
the time t is given by the integration

͵

v

0

dv ϭ Ϫu

͵

m

dm
Ϫg
m0 m

͵ dt
t

0

or
v ϭ u ln

m0
Ϫ gt
m

Since the fuel is burned at the constant rate mЈ ϭ Ϫm, the mass at any time
˙
t is m ϭ m0 ϩ mt. If we let mb stand for the mass of the rocket when burnout oc˙
ᕢ curs, then the time at burnout becomes tb ϭ (mb Ϫ m0)/m ϭ (m0 Ϫ mb)/(Ϫm).
˙
˙
This time gives the condition for maximum velocity, which is
vmax ϭ u ln

m0
mb

ϩ

g
(m Ϫ mb)
m
˙ 0

Ans.

The quantity m is a negative number since the mass decreases with time.
˙

Solution II (Variable-Mass Solution).

If we use Eq. 4/20, then ⌺F ϭ Ϫmg

and the equation becomes
[ΣF ϭ mv ϩ mu]
˙ ˙

Ϫmg ϭ mv ϩ mu
˙ ˙

But mu ϭ ϪmЈu ϭ ϪT so that the equation of motion becomes
˙
T Ϫ mg ϭ mv
˙
which is the same as formulated with Solution I.

ᕢ Vertical launch from the north pole
is taken only to eliminate any complication due to the earth’s rotation
in ﬁguring the absolute trajectory of
the rocket.

Article 4/7

PROBLEMS
Introductory Problems
4/69 At the instant of vertical launch the rocket expels
exhaust at the rate of 220 kg/s with an exhaust velocity of 820 m/s. If the initial vertical acceleration is
6.80 m/s2, calculate the total mass of the rocket and
fuel at launch.

Problems

309

4/71 The space shuttle, together with its central fuel tank
and two booster rockets, has a total mass of 2.04(106)
kg at liftoff. Each of the two booster rockets produces a thrust of 11.80(106) N, and each of the three
main engines of the shuttle produces a thrust of
2.00(106) N. The speciﬁc impulse (ratio of exhaust
velocity to gravitational acceleration) for each of the
three main engines of the shuttle is 455 s. Calculate
the initial vertical acceleration a of the assembly
with all ﬁve engines operating and ﬁnd the rate at
which fuel is being consumed by each of the shuttle’s
three engines.

a = 6.8 m/s2

Problem 4/71
Problem 4/69

4/70 When the rocket reaches the position in its trajectory shown, it has a mass of 3 Mg and is beyond the
effect of the earth’s atmosphere. Gravitational acceleration is 9.60 m/s2. Fuel is being consumed at the rate
of 130 kg/s, and the exhaust velocity relative to the
nozzle is 600 m/s. Compute the n- and t-components of
acceleration of the rocket.
Vert.

4/72 A tank truck for washing down streets has a total
weight of 20,000 lb when its tank is full. With the
spray turned on, 80 lb of water per second issue from
the nozzle with a velocity of 60 ft/sec relative to the
truck at the 30Њ angle shown. If the truck is to accelerate at the rate of 2 ft/sec2 when starting on a level
road, determine the required tractive force P between the tires and the road when (a) the spray is
turned on and (b) the spray is turned off.

t

30°
Horiz.

a
30°

n
Problem 4/72

Problem 4/70

310

Chapter 4

Kinetics of Systems of Particles

4/73 A tank, which has a mass of 50 kg when empty, is
propelled to the left by a force P and scoops up fresh
water from a stream ﬂowing in the opposite direction with a velocity of 1.5 m/s. The entrance area of
the scoop is 2000 mm2, and water enters the scoop at
a rate equal to the velocity of the scoop relative to
the stream. Determine the force P at a certain instant for which 80 kg of water have been ingested
and the velocity and acceleration of the tank are
2 m/s and 0.4 m/s2, respectively. Neglect the small
impact pressure at the scoop necessary to elevate the
water in the tank.

a

v

P

b
x

Problem 4/75

4/76 Fresh water issues from the two 30-mm-diameter
holes in the bucket with a velocity of 2.5 m/s in the
directions shown. Calculate the force P required to
give the bucket an upward acceleration of 0.5 m/s2
from rest if it contains 20 kg of water at that time.
The empty bucket has a mass of 0.6 kg.

1.5 m/s

Problem 4/73
P

4/74 A small rocket of initial mass m0 is ﬁred vertically
upward near the surface of the earth ( g constant). If
air resistance is neglected, determine the manner in
which the mass m of the rocket must vary as a function of the time t after launching in order that the
rocket may have a constant vertical acceleration a,
with a constant relative velocity u of the escaping
gases with respect to the nozzle.
4/75 The magnetometer boom for a spacecraft consists of
a large number of triangular-shaped units which
spring into their deployed conﬁguration upon release from the canister in which they were folded
and packed prior to release. Write an expression for
the force F which the base of the canister must exert
on the boom during its deployment in terms of the
increasing length x and its time derivatives. The
mass of the boom per unit of deployed length is ␳.
Treat the supporting base on the spacecraft as a
ﬁxed platform and assume that the deployment
takes place outside of any gravitational ﬁeld. Neglect
the dimension b compared with x.

20°

20°

Problem 4/76

Article 4/7

Representative Problems
4/77 The upper end of the open-link chain of length L and
mass ␳ per unit length is lowered at a constant speed
v by the force P. Determine the reading R of the
platform scale in terms of x.

P

x

v

Problems

311

4/79 A railroad coal car weighs 54,600 lb empty and carries a total load of 180,000 lb of coal. The bins are
equipped with bottom doors which permit discharging coal through an opening between the rails. If the
car dumps coal at the rate of 20,000 lb/sec in a downward direction relative to the car, and if frictional
resistance to motion is 4 lb per ton of total remaining weight, determine the coupler force P required
to give the car an acceleration of 0.15 ft/sec2 in the
direction of P at the instant when half the coal has
been dumped.

L
P

Problem 4/79
Problem 4/77

4/78 At a bulk loading station, gravel leaves the hopper at
the rate of 220 lb/sec with a velocity of 10 ft/sec in
the direction shown and is deposited on the moving
ﬂatbed truck. The tractive force between the driving
wheels and the road is 380 lb, which overcomes the
200 lb of frictional road resistance. Determine the
acceleration a of the truck 4 seconds after the hopper is opened over the truck bed, at which instant
the truck has a forward speed of 1.5 mi/hr. The
empty weight of the truck is 12,000 lb.

60°

4/80 The ﬁgure represents an idealized one-dimensional
structure of uniform mass ␳ per unit length moving
horizontally with a velocity v0 when its front end collides with an immovable barrier and crushes. The
force F required to initiate and maintain an accordionlike deformation is constant. Neglect the length
b of the collapsed portion of the structure compared
with the movement of s of the undeformed portion
following the impact. The undeformed part may be
viewed as a body of decreasing mass. Derive the differential equation which relates F to s, ˙, and ¨ by
s
s
using Eq. 4/20 carefully. Check your expression by
applying Eq. 4/6 to both parts together as a system
of constant mass.

v
10 ft/sec

L

v0

s
b

Problem 4/78

L–s

F

Problem 4/80

312

Chapter 4

Kinetics of Systems of Particles

4/81 A coil of heavy ﬂexible cable with a total length of
100 m and a mass of 1.2 kg/m is to be laid along a
straight horizontal line. The end is secured to a post
at A, and the cable peels off the coil and emerges
through the horizontal opening in the cart as shown.
The cart and drum together have a mass of 40 kg.
If the cart is moving to the right with a velocity of
2 m/s when 30 m of cable remain in the drum and
the tension in the rope at the post is 2.4 N, determine the force P required to give the cart and drum
an acceleration of 0.3 m/s2. Neglect all friction.

4/83 An open-link chain of length L ϭ 8 m with a mass of
48 kg is resting on a smooth horizontal surface when
end A is doubled back on itself by a force P applied to
end A. (a) Calculate the required value of P to give A
a constant velocity of 1.5 m/s. (b) Calculate the acceleration a of end A if P ϭ 20 N and if v ϭ 1.5 m/s
when x ϭ 4 m.
v
x
x
–
2

A

P

L

P
A

Problem 4/83
x
Problem 4/81

4/82 By lowering a scoop as it skims the surface of a body
of water, the aircraft (nicknamed the “Super Scooper”)
is able to ingest 4.5 m3 of fresh water during a 12second run. The plane then ﬂies to a ﬁre area and
makes a massive water drop with the ability to repeat the procedure as many times as necessary. The
plane approaches its run with a velocity of 280 km/h
and an initial mass of 16.4 Mg. As the scoop enters
the water, the pilot advances the throttle to provide
an additional 300 hp (223.8 kW) needed to prevent
undue deceleration. Determine the initial deceleration when the scooping action starts. (Neglect the
difference between the average and the initial rates
of water intake.)

v

Scoop
Problem 4/82

4/84 A small rocket-propelled vehicle weighs 125 lb, including 20 lb of fuel. Fuel is burned at the constant
rate of 2 lb/sec with an exhaust velocity relative to
the nozzle of 400 ft/sec. Upon ignition the vehicle is
released from rest on the 10Њ incline. Calculate the
maximum velocity v reached by the vehicle. Neglect
all friction.

10°
Problem 4/84

Article 4/7
4/85 Determine the force P required to give the open-link
chain of total length L a constant velocity v ϭ ˙. The
y
chain has a mass ␳ per unit length. Also, by applying
the impulse-momentum equation to the left-hand
portion of the system, verify that the force R supporting the pile of chain equals the weight of the
pile. Neglect the small size and mass of the pulley
and any friction in the pulley.

y

h

Problems

313

4/87 The cart carries a pile of open-link chain of mass ␳
per unit length. The chain passes freely through the
hole in the cart and is brought to rest, link by link,
by the tension T in the portion of the chain resting
on the ground and secured at its end A. The cart and
the chain on it move under the action of the constant force P and have a velocity v0 and mass m0
when x ϭ 0. Determine expressions for the acceleration a and velocity v of the cart in terms of x if all
friction is neglected. Also ﬁnd T. Observe that the
transition link 2 is decelerated from the velocity v to
zero velocity by the tension T transmitted by the last
horizontal link 1. Also note that link 2 exerts no
force on the following link 3 during the transition.
Explain why the mu term is absent if Eq. 4/20 is ap˙
plied to this problem.

P

v
P
A
x

1 2 3
Transition link 2

Problem 4/85

4/86 A coal car with an empty mass of 25 Mg is moving
freely with a speed of 1.2 m/s under a hopper which
opens and releases coal into the moving car at the
constant rate of 4 Mg per second. Determine the distance x moved by the car during the time that 32 Mg
of coal are deposited in the car. Neglect any frictional
resistance to rolling along the horizontal track.

Problem 4/87

4/88 The open-link chain of length L and mass ␳ per unit
length is released from rest in the position shown,
where the bottom link is almost touching the platform
and the horizontal section is supported on a smooth
surface. Friction at the corner guide is negligible. Determine (a) the velocity v1 of end A as it reaches the
corner and (b) its velocity v2 as it strikes the platform.
(c) Also specify the total loss Q of energy.
L–h
A

v0
h

Problem 4/86
Problem 4/88

314

Chapter 4

Kinetics of Systems of Particles

4/89 In the ﬁgure is shown a system used to arrest the
motion of an airplane landing on a ﬁeld of restricted
length. The plane of mass m rolling freely with a velocity v0 engages a hook which pulls the ends of two
heavy chains, each of length L and mass ␳ per unit
length, in the manner shown. A conservative calculation of the effectiveness of the device neglects the
retardation of chain friction on the ground and any
other resistance to the motion of the airplane. With
these assumptions, compute the velocity v of the airplane at the instant when the last link of each chain
is put in motion. Also determine the relation between the displacement x and the time t after contact with the chain. Assume each link of the chain
acquires its velocity v suddenly upon contact with
the moving links.
v

v0

x

x
–
2

᭤4/91 Replace the chain of Prob. 4/90 by a ﬂexible rope or
bicycle chain of mass ␳ per unit length and total
length L. The free end is released from rest at x ϭ 0
and falls under the inﬂuence of gravity. Determine
the acceleration a of the free end, the force R at the
ﬁxed end, and the tension T1 in the rope at the loop,
all in terms of x. (Note that a is greater than g. What
happens to the energy of the system when x ϭ L?)
᭤4/92 One end of the pile of chain falls through a hole in
its support and pulls the remaining links after it in
a steady flow. If the links which are initially at rest
acquire the velocity of the chain suddenly and without frictional resistance or interference from the
support or from adjacent links, find the velocity v
of the chain as a function of x if v ϭ 0 when x ϭ 0.
Also find the acceleration a of the falling chain and
the energy Q lost from the system as the last link
leaves the platform. (Hint: Apply Eq. 4/20 and treat
the product xv as the variable when solving the differential equation. Also note at the appropriate
step that dx ϭ v dt.) The total length of the chain is
L, and its mass per unit length is ␳.

L
Problem 4/89

᭤ 4/90 The free end of the open-link chain of total length L
and mass ␳ per unit length is released from rest at
x ϭ 0. Determine the force R on the ﬁxed end and
the tension T1 in the chain at the lower end of the
nonmoving part in terms of x. Also ﬁnd the total loss
Q of energy when x ϭ L.

x

Problem 4/92
x

Problem 4/90

Article 4/8

4/8

CHAPTER REVIEW

In this chapter we have extended the principles of dynamics for the
motion of a single mass particle to the motion of a general system of
particles. Such a system can form a rigid body, a nonrigid (elastic) solid
body, or a group of separate and unconnected particles, such as those in
a deﬁned mass of liquid or gaseous particles. The following summarizes
the principal results of Chapter 4.
1. We derived the generalized form of Newton’s second law, which is
expressed as the principle of motion of the mass center, Eq. 4/1 in
Art. 4/2. This principle states that the vector sum of the external
forces acting on any system of mass particles equals the total system mass times the acceleration of the center of mass.
2. In Art. 4/3, we established a work-energy principle for a system of
particles, Eq. 4/3a, and showed that the total kinetic energy of the
system equals the energy of the mass-center translation plus the energy due to motion of the particles relative to the mass center.
3. The resultant of the external forces acting on any system equals the
time rate of change of the linear momentum of the system, Eq. 4/6
in Art. 4/4.
4. For a ﬁxed point O and the mass center G, the resultant vector moment of all external forces about the point equals the time rate of
change of angular momentum about the point, Eq. 4/7 and Eq. 4/9
in Art. 4/4. The principle for an arbitrary point P, Eqs. 4/11 and
4/13, has an additional term and thus does not follow the form of
the equations for O and G.
5. In Art. 4/5 we developed the law of conservation of dynamical energy, which applies to a system in which the internal kinetic friction
is negligible.
6. Conservation of linear momentum applies to a system in the absence
of an external linear impulse. Similarly, conservation of angular momentum applies when there is no external angular impulse.
7. For applications involving steady mass ﬂow, we developed a relation, Eq. 4/18 in Art. 4/6, between the resultant force on a system,
the corresponding mass ﬂow rate, and the change in ﬂuid velocity
from entrance to exit.
8. Analysis of angular momentum in steady mass ﬂow resulted in Eq.
4/19a in Art. 4/6, which is a relation between the resultant moment
of all external forces about a ﬁxed point O on or off the system, the
mass ﬂow rate, and the incoming and outgoing velocities.
9. Finally, in Art. 4/7 we developed the equation of linear motion for
variable-mass systems, Eq. 4/20. Common examples of such systems
are rockets and ﬂexible chains and ropes.
The principles developed in this chapter enable us to treat the motion of both rigid and nonrigid bodies in a uniﬁed manner. In addition,
the developments in Arts. 4/2–4/5 will serve to place on a rigorous basis
the treatment of rigid-body kinetics in Chapters 6 and 7.

Chapter Review

315

316

Chapter 4

Kinetics of Systems of Particles

REVIEW PROBLEMS
4/93 Each of the identical steel balls weighs 4 lb and is
fastened to the other two by connecting bars of negligible weight and unequal length. In the absence of
friction at the supporting horizontal surface, determine the initial acceleration a of the mass center of
the assembly when it is subjected to the horizontal
force F ϭ 20 lb applied to the supporting ball. The
assembly is initially at rest in the vertical plane. Can
you show that a is initially horizontal?

4/95 In an operational design test of the equipment of the
ﬁre truck, the water cannon is delivering fresh water
through its 2-in.-diameter nozzle at the rate of 1400
gal/min at the 20Њ angle. Calculate the total friction
force F exerted by the pavement on the tires of the
truck, which remains in a ﬁxed position with its
brakes locked. (There are 231 in.3 in 1 gal.)
v
20°

F

Problem 4/95

4/96 A small rocket of initial mass m0 is ﬁred vertically up
near the surface of the earth ( g constant), and the
mass rate of exhaust mЈ and the relative exhaust
velocity u are constant. Determine the velocity v as a
function of the time t of ﬂight if the air resistance is
neglected and if the mass of the rocket case and machinery is negligible compared with the mass of the
fuel carried.
Problem 4/93

4/94 A 2-oz bullet is fired horizontally with a velocity
v ϭ 1000 ft/sec into the slender bar of a 3-lb pendulum initially at rest. If the bullet embeds itself in the
bar, compute the resulting angular velocity of the pendulum immediately after the impact. Treat the sphere
as a particle and neglect the mass of the rod. Why is
the linear momentum of the system not conserved?

4/97 The two balls are attached to the light rigid rod,
which is suspended by a cord from the support above
it. If the balls and rod, initially at rest, are struck
with the force F ϭ 12 lb, calculate the corresponding
¨
acceleration a of the mass center and the rate ␪ at
which the angular velocity of the bar is changing.

7″
3″

O
ω

10″

F

6″
4 lb

2 oz

v

10″
2 lb

10″

Problem 4/97

3 lb
Before
Problem 4/94

After

Article 4/8
4/98 The rocket shown is designed to test the operation of
a new guidance system. When it has reached a certain altitude beyond the effective inﬂuence of the
earth’s atmosphere, its mass has decreased to 2.80 Mg,
and its trajectory is 30Њ from the vertical. Rocket fuel
is being consumed at the rate of 120 kg/s with an
exhaust velocity of 640 m/s relative to the nozzle.
Gravitational acceleration is 9.34 m/s2 at its altitude.
Calculate the n- and t-components of the acceleration of the rocket.
Vert.

Review Problems

317

4/100 The three identical spheres, each of mass m, are
supported in the vertical plane on the 30Њ incline.
The spheres are welded to the two connecting rods
of negligible mass. The upper rod, also of negligible
mass, is pivoted freely to the upper sphere and to
the bracket at A. If the stop at B is suddenly removed, determine the velocity v with which the
upper sphere hits the incline. (Note that the corresponding velocity of the middle sphere is v/2.) Explain the loss of energy which has occurred after all
motion has ceased.

t

30°

10″
A
60°
10″

60°

Horiz.
B

n

30°
Problem 4/100

Problem 4/98

4/99 A two-stage rocket is ﬁred vertically up and is above
the atmosphere when the ﬁrst stage burns out and
the second stage separates and ignites. The second
stage carries 1200 kg of fuel and has an empty mass
of 200 kg. Upon ignition the second stage burns fuel
at the rate of 5.2 kg/s and has a constant exhaust
velocity of 3000 m/s relative to its nozzle. Determine
the acceleration of the second stage 60 seconds after
ignition and ﬁnd the maximum acceleration and
the time t after ignition at which it occurs. Neglect
the variation of g and take it to be 8.70 m/s2 for the
range of altitude averaging about 400 km.

4/101 A jet of fresh water under pressure issues from
the 3/4-in.-diameter fixed nozzle with a velocity
v ϭ 120 ft/sec and is diverted into the two equal
streams. Neglect any energy loss in the streams
and compute the force F required to hold the
vane in place.
30°

A
F

v

30°
Problem 4/101

318

Chapter 4

Kinetics of Systems of Particles

4/102 An ideal rope or bicycle-type chain of length L and
mass ␳ per unit length is resting on a smooth horizontal surface when end A is doubled back on itself
by a force P applied to end A. End B of the rope is
secured to a ﬁxed support. Determine the force P
required to give A a constant velocity v. (Hint: The
action of the loop can be modeled by inserting a circular disk of negligible mass as shown in the separate sketch and then taking the disk radius as zero.
It is easily shown that the tensions in the rope at C,
D, and B are all equal to P under the ideal conditions imposed and with constant velocity.)

T
60°

60°

A

B

C

L
x

Problem 4/103
x
–
2

A

P
B

C
r
D
Problem 4/102

4/103 In the static test of a jet engine and exhaust nozzle
assembly, air is sucked into the engine at the rate
of 30 kg/s and fuel is burned at the rate of 1.6 kg/s.
The ﬂow area, static pressure, and axial-ﬂow velocity for the three sections shown are as follows:
Sec. A
2

Flow area, m
Static pressure, kPa
Axial-ﬂow velocity, m/s

Sec. B

Sec. C

0.15
Ϫ14
120

0.16
140
315

0.06
14
600

Determine the tension T in the diagonal member of
the supporting test stand and calculate the force F
exerted on the nozzle ﬂange at B by the bolts and
gasket to hold the nozzle to the engine housing.

4/104 The upper end of the open-link chain of length L
and mass ␳ per unit length is released from rest
with the lower end just touching the platform of
the scale. Determine the expression for the force F
read on the scale as a function of the distance x
through which the upper end has fallen. (Comment:
The chain acquires a free-fall velocity of Ί2gx because the links on the scale exert no force on those
above, which are still falling freely. Work the problem in two ways: ﬁrst, by evaluating the time rate
of change of momentum for the entire chain and
second, by considering the force F to be composed
of the weight of the links at rest on the scale plus
the force necessary to divert an equivalent stream
of ﬂuid.)
x

L

Problem 4/104

Article 4/8
4/105 The open-link chain of total length L and of mass ␳
per unit length is released from rest at x ϭ 0 at the
same instant that the platform starts from rest at
y ϭ 0 and moves vertically up with a constant acceleration a. Determine the expression for the total
force R exerted on the platform by the chain t seconds after the motion starts.
x

Review Problems

319

4/107 The diverter section of pipe between A and B is designed to allow the parallel pipes to clear an obstruction. The ﬂange of the diverter is secured at C
by a heavy bolt. The pipe carries fresh water at the
steady rate of 5000 gal/min under a static pressure
of 130 lb/in.2 entering the diverter. The inside diameter of the pipe at A and at B is 4 in. The tensions in the pipe at A and B are balanced by the
pressure in the pipe acting over the ﬂow area.
There is no shear or bending of the pipes at A or B.
Calculate the moment M supported by the bolt at
C. (Recall that 1 gallon contains 231 in.3)
B

L

v

8″
v

y

A

Problem 4/105

4/106 The three identical 2-kg spheres are welded to the
connecting rods of negligible mass and are hanging
by a cord from point A. The spheres are initially at
rest when a horizontal force F ϭ 16 N is applied to
the upper sphere. Calculate the initial acceleration
¨
a of the mass center of the spheres, the rate ␪ at
which the angular velocity is increasing, and the
initial acceleration a of the top sphere.

A

C

Problem 4/107

4/108 The chain of length L and mass ␳ per unit length is
released from rest on the smooth horizontal surface with a negligibly small overhang x to initiate
motion. Determine (a) the acceleration a as a function of x, (b) the tension T in the chain at the
smooth corner as a function of x, and (c) the velocity v of the last link A as it reaches the corner.
x

L–x
2 kg

F
A
x

60°

60°

2 kg

2 kg
Problem 4/108
300
mm
Problem 4/106

320

Chapter 4

Kinetics of Systems of Particles

᭤4/109 A rope or hinged-link bicycle-type chain of length L
and mass ␳ per unit length is released from rest
with x ϭ 0. Determine the expression for the total
force R exerted on the ﬁxed platform by the chain
as a function of x. Note that the hinged-link chain
is a conservative system during all but the last increment of motion. Compare the result with that of
Prob. 4/105 if the upward motion of the platform in
that problem is taken to be zero.
x

A
75 mm

200 mm

B
D

C

150
mm

150
mm

Problem 4/110

L

Problem 4/109
3
᭤4/110 The centrifugal pump handles 20 m of fresh water
per minute with inlet and outlet velocities of 18 m/s.
The impeller is turned clockwise through the shaft
at O by a motor which delivers 40 kW at a pump
speed of 900 rev/min. With the pump ﬁlled but not
turning, the vertical reactions at C and D are each
250 N. Calculate the forces exerted by the foundation on the pump at C and D while the pump is
running. The tensions in the connecting pipes at A
and B are exactly balanced by the respective forces
due to the static pressure in the water. (Suggestion: Isolate the entire pump and water within it
between sections A and B and apply the momentum principle to the entire system.)

᭤4/111 Replace the pile of chain in Prob. 4/92 by a coil of
rope of mass ␳ per unit length and total length L as
shown and determine the velocity of the falling section in terms of x if it starts from rest at x ϭ 0.
Show that the acceleration is constant at g/2. The
rope is considered to be perfectly ﬂexible in bending but inextensible and constitutes a conservative
system (no energy loss). Rope elements acquire
their velocity in a continuous manner from zero
to v in a small transition section of the rope at the
top of the coil. For comparison with the chain of
Prob. 4/92, this transition section may be considered to have negligible length without violating the
requirement that there be no energy loss in the
present problem. Also determine the force R exerted
by the platform on the coil in terms of x and
explain why R becomes zero when x ϭ 2L/3. Neglect
the dimensions of the coil compared with x.

x

v

Problem 4/111

Article 4/8
᭤4/112 The chain of mass ␳ per unit length passes over the
small freely turning pulley and is released from
rest with only a small imbalance h to initiate motion. Determine the acceleration a and velocity v of
the chain and the force R supported by the hook at
A, all in terms of h as it varies from essentially zero
to H. Neglect the weight of the pulley and its supporting frame and the weight of the small amount
of chain in contact with the pulley. (Hint: The force
R does not equal two times the equal tensions T in
the chain tangent to the pulley.)

Review Problems

A

H

h
h
Problem 4/112

321

PART II

Dynamics of
Rigid Bodies

Rigid-body kinematics describes the relationships between the linear and angular motions of bodies without regard to the forces and moments associated with such motions. The designs of gears, cams, connecting links, and
many other moving machine parts are largely kinematic problems.
R. Ian Lloyd/Masterile

Plane Kinematics
of Rigid Bodies

5

CHAPTER OUTLINE
5/1 Introduction
5/2 Rotation
5/3 Absolute Motion
5/4 Relative Velocity
5/5 Instantaneous Center of Zero Velocity
5/6 Relative Acceleration
5/7 Motion Relative to Rotating Axes
5/8 Chapter Review

5/1

Introduction

In Chapter 2 on particle kinematics, we developed the relationships
governing the displacement, velocity, and acceleration of points as they
moved along straight or curved paths. In rigid-body kinematics we use
these same relationships but must also account for the rotational motion of the body. Thus rigid-body kinematics involves both linear and
angular displacements, velocities, and accelerations.
We need to describe the motion of rigid bodies for two important
reasons. First, we frequently need to generate, transmit, or control certain motions by the use of cams, gears, and linkages of various types.
Here we must analyze the displacement, velocity, and acceleration of
the motion to determine the design geometry of the mechanical parts.
Furthermore, as a result of the motion generated, forces may be developed which must be accounted for in the design of the parts.
Second, we must often determine the motion of a rigid body caused
by the forces applied to it. Calculation of the motion of a rocket under
the inﬂuence of its thrust and gravitational attraction is an example of
such a problem.
We need to apply the principles of rigid-body kinematics in both situations. This chapter covers the kinematics of rigid-body motion which
may be analyzed as occurring in a single plane. In Chapter 7 we will present an introduction to the kinematics of motion in three dimensions.
325

326

Chapter 5

Plane Kinematics of Rigid Bodies

David Parker/Photo Researchers, Inc.

Rigid-Body Assumption
In the previous chapter we deﬁned a rigid body as a system of particles for which the distances between the particles remain unchanged.
Thus, if each particle of such a body is located by a position vector from
reference axes attached to and rotating with the body, there will be no
change in any position vector as measured from these axes. This is, of
course, an ideal case since all solid materials change shape to some extent when forces are applied to them.
Nevertheless, if the movements associated with the changes in
shape are very small compared with the movements of the body as a
whole, then the assumption of rigidity is usually acceptable. The displacements due to the ﬂutter of an aircraft wing, for instance, do not affect the description of the ﬂight path of the aircraft as a whole, and thus
the rigid-body assumption is clearly acceptable. On the other hand, if
the problem is one of describing, as a function of time, the internal wing
stress due to wing ﬂutter, then the relative motions of portions of the
wing cannot be neglected, and the wing may not be considered a rigid
body. In this and the next two chapters, almost all of the material is
based on the assumption of rigidity.

These nickel microgears are only 150
microns (150(10 Ϫ6 ) m) thick and have
potential application in microscopic
robots.

Plane Motion
A rigid body executes plane motion when all parts of the body move
in parallel planes. For convenience, we generally consider the plane of
motion to be the plane which contains the mass center, and we treat the
body as a thin slab whose motion is conﬁned to the plane of the slab.
This idealization adequately describes a very large category of rigidbody motions encountered in engineering.
The plane motion of a rigid body may be divided into several categories, as represented in Fig. 5/1.
Translation is deﬁned as any motion in which every line in the
body remains parallel to its original position at all times. In translation
there is no rotation of any line in the body. In rectilinear translation,
part a of Fig. 5/1, all points in the body move in parallel straight lines.
In curvilinear translation, part b, all points move on congruent curves.
We note that in each of the two cases of translation, the motion of the
body is completely speciﬁed by the motion of any point in the body, since
all points have the same motion. Thus, our earlier study of the motion of
a point (particle) in Chapter 2 enables us to describe completely the
translation of a rigid body.
Rotation about a ﬁxed axis, part c of Fig. 5/1, is the angular motion
about the axis. It follows that all particles in a rigid body move in circular paths about the axis of rotation, and all lines in the body which are
perpendicular to the axis of rotation (including those which do not pass
through the axis) rotate through the same angle in the same time.
Again, our discussion in Chapter 2 on the circular motion of a point enables us to describe the motion of a rotating rigid body, which is treated
in the next article.
General plane motion of a rigid body, part d of Fig. 5/1, is a combination of translation and rotation. We will utilize the principles of relative motion covered in Art. 2/8 to describe general plane motion.

Article 5/2

Type of Rigid-Body Plane Motion

Rotation

Example

A′

A
(a)
Rectilinear
translation
B′

B

Rocket test sled
A′

A
(b)
Curvilinear
translation
B′

B

Parallel-link swinging plate
A
(c)
Fixed-axis
rotation

θ
B

B′
Compound pendulum

A

A′

(d)
General
plane motion
B

B′

Connecting rod in a
reciprocating engine

Figure 5/1

Note that in each of the examples cited, the actual paths of all particles in the body are projected onto the single plane of motion as represented in each ﬁgure.
Analysis of the plane motion of rigid bodies is accomplished either
by directly calculating the absolute displacements and their time derivatives from the geometry involved or by utilizing the principles of relative
motion. Each method is important and useful and will be covered in
turn in the articles which follow.

5/2

Rotation

The rotation of a rigid body is described by its angular motion.
Figure 5/2 shows a rigid body which is rotating as it undergoes plane
motion in the plane of the figure. The angular positions of any two
lines 1 and 2 attached to the body are specified by ␪1 and ␪2 measured
from any convenient fixed reference direction. Because the angle ␤ is
invariant, the relation ␪2 ϭ ␪1 ϩ ␤ upon differentiation with respect
˙
˙
¨
¨
to time gives ␪ 2 ϭ ␪ 1 and ␪ 2 ϭ ␪ 1 or, during a ﬁnite interval, ⌬␪2 ϭ ⌬␪1.
Thus, all lines on a rigid body in its plane of motion have the same angular displacement, the same angular velocity, and the same angular
acceleration.

1

2

β

θ2
θ1

Figure 5/2

327

328

Chapter 5

Plane Kinematics of Rigid Bodies

Note that the angular motion of a line depends only on its angular
position with respect to any arbitrary ﬁxed reference and on the time
derivatives of the displacement. Angular motion does not require the
presence of a ﬁxed axis, normal to the plane of motion, about which the
line and the body rotate.

KEY CONCEPTS
Angular-Motion Relations
The angular velocity ␻ and angular acceleration ␣ of a rigid body in
plane rotation are, respectively, the ﬁrst and second time derivatives of
the angular position coordinate ␪ of any line in the plane of motion of
the body. These deﬁnitions give
␻ϭ

d␪
˙
ϭ␪
dt
d2␪
¨
ϭ␪
dt2

d␻
ϭ␻
˙
dt

or

␣ϭ

␻ d␻ ϭ ␣ d␪

or

˙ ˙ ¨
␪ d ␪ ϭ ␪ d␪

␣ϭ

(5/1)

The third relation is obtained by eliminating dt from the ﬁrst two. In
each of these relations, the positive direction for ␻ and ␣, clockwise or
counterclockwise, is the same as that chosen for ␪. Equations 5/1 should
be recognized as analogous to the deﬁning equations for the rectilinear
motion of a particle, expressed by Eqs. 2/1, 2/2, and 2/3. In fact, all relations which were described for rectilinear motion in Art. 2/2 apply to the
case of rotation in a plane if the linear quantities s, v, and a are replaced
by their respective equivalent angular quantities ␪, ␻, and ␣. As we proceed further with rigid-body dynamics, we will ﬁnd that the analogies
between the relationships for linear and angular motion are almost
complete throughout kinematics and kinetics. These relations are important to recognize, as they help to demonstrate the symmetry and
unity found throughout mechanics.
For rotation with constant angular acceleration, the integrals of
Eqs. 5/1 becomes
␻ ϭ ␻0 ϩ ␣t
␻2 ϭ ␻02 ϩ 2␣(␪ Ϫ ␪0)
1

␪ ϭ ␪0 ϩ ␻0t ϩ 2 ␣t2
Here ␪0 and ␻0 are the values of the angular position coordinate and angular velocity, respectively, at t ϭ 0, and t is the duration of the motion
considered. You should be able to carry out these integrations easily, as
they are completely analogous to the corresponding equations for rectilinear motion with constant acceleration covered in Art. 2/2.
The graphical relationships described for s, v, a, and t in Figs. 2/3
and 2/4 may be used for ␪, ␻, and ␣ merely by substituting the corresponding symbols. You should sketch these graphical relations for plane

Article 5/2

Rotation

rotation. The mathematical procedures for obtaining rectilinear velocity
and displacement from rectilinear acceleration may be applied to rotation by merely replacing the linear quantities by their corresponding angular quantities.

Rotation about a Fixed Axis
When a rigid body rotates about a ﬁxed axis, all points other than
those on the axis move in concentric circles about the ﬁxed axis. Thus,
for the rigid body in Fig. 5/3 rotating about a ﬁxed axis normal to the
plane of the ﬁgure through O, any point such as A moves in a circle of
radius r. From the previous discussion in Art. 2/5, you should already be
familiar with the relationships between the linear motion of A and the
angular motion of the line normal to its path, which is also the angular
˙
motion of the rigid body. With the notation ␻ ϭ ␪ and ␣ ϭ ␻ ϭ ␪ for the
˙ ¨
angular velocity and angular acceleration, respectively, of the body we
have Eqs. 2/11, rewritten as

t
v = rω
at = rα
A

α
ω
O

an = rω 2

n
r

v ϭ r␻
an ϭ r␻2 ϭ v2/r ϭ v␻

(5/2)

at ϭ r␣
These quantities may be expressed alternatively using the cross-product relationship of vector notation. The vector formulation is especially
important in the analysis of three-dimensional motion. The angular velocity of the rotating body may be expressed by the vector ␻ normal to the
plane of rotation and having a sense governed by the right-hand rule, as
shown in Fig. 5/4a. From the deﬁnition of the vector cross product, we see
that the vector v is obtained by crossing ␻ into r. This cross product gives
the correct magnitude and direction for v and we write
vϭ˙ϭ␻؋r
r
The order of the vectors to be crossed must be retained. The reverse
order gives r ؋ ␻ ϭ Ϫv.

·
α=ω
ω

v

·
θ

ω

O

O
r

A

(a)

v=ω × r

A
an = ω
× (ω ×
r)

(b)

Figure 5/4

at = α × r

Figure 5/3

329

330

Chapter 5

Plane Kinematics of Rigid Bodies

The acceleration of point A is obtained by differentiating the crossproduct expression for v, which gives
r ˙
aϭ˙ϭ␻؋˙ϩ␻؋r
v
ϭ ␻ ؋ (␻ ؋ r) ϩ ␻ ؋ r
˙
ϭ␻؋vϩ␣؋r

© Steven Haggard/Alamy

Here ␣ ϭ ␻ stands for the angular acceleration of the body. Thus, the
˙
vector equivalents to Eqs. 5/2 are
vϭ␻؋r
an ϭ ␻ ؋ (␻ ؋ r)

(5/3)

at ϭ ␣ ؋ r
and are shown in Fig. 5/4b.
For three-dimensional motion of a rigid body, the angular-velocity
vector ␻ may change direction as well as magnitude, and in this case,
the angular acceleration, which is the time derivative of angular velocity, ␣ ϭ ␻, will no longer be in the same direction as ␻.
˙

© Nomad/SUPERSTOCK

This pulley-cable system is part of
an elevator mechanism.

These pulleys and cables are part of the San Francisco cable-car system.

Article 5/2

Rotation

331

SAMPLE PROBLEM 5/1
A ﬂywheel rotating freely at 1800 rev/min clockwise is subjected to a variable counterclockwise torque which is ﬁrst applied at time t ϭ 0. The torque produces a counterclockwise angular acceleration ␣ ϭ 4t rad/s2, where t is the time
in seconds during which the torque is applied. Determine (a) the time required
for the ﬂywheel to reduce its clockwise angular speed to 900 rev/min, (b) the time
required for the ﬂywheel to reverse its direction of rotation, and (c) the total
number of revolutions, clockwise plus counterclockwise, turned by the ﬂywheel
during the ﬁrst 14 seconds of torque application.

Solution.

The counterclockwise direction will be taken arbitrarily as positive.

(a) Since ␣ is a known function of the time, we may integrate it to obtain angular

ᕡ velocity. With the initial angular velocity of Ϫ1800(2␲)/60 ϭ Ϫ60␲ rad/s, we have
[d␻ ϭ ␣ dt]

͵

␻

͵ 4t dt
t

Ϫ60␲

d␻ ϭ

0

␻ ϭ Ϫ60␲ ϩ

2t2

Substituting the clockwise angular speed of 900 rev/min or ␻ ϭ Ϫ900(2␲)/60 ϭ
Ϫ30␲ rad/s gives
Ϫ30␲ ϭ Ϫ60␲ ϩ 2t2

t2 ϭ 15␲

t ϭ 6.86 s

Ans.

(b) The ﬂywheel changes direction when its angular velocity is momentarily
zero. Thus,

Helpful Hints

ᕡ We must be very careful to be consistent with our algebraic signs. The
lower limit is the negative (clockwise)
value of the initial angular velocity.
Also we must convert revolutions to
radians since ␣ is in radian units.
64.8π

Angular
velocity
ω , rad/s
CCW
6.86 9.71

t2 ϭ 30␲

0 ϭ Ϫ60␲ ϩ 2t2

t ϭ 9.71 s

Ans.

(c) The total number of revolutions through which the ﬂywheel turns during
14 seconds is the number of clockwise turns N1 during the ﬁrst 9.71 seconds,
plus the number of counterclockwise turns N2 during the remainder of the interval. Integrating the expression for ␻ in terms of t gives us the angular displacement in radians. Thus, for the ﬁrst interval
[d␪ ϭ ␻ dt]

͵

␪1

d␪ ϭ

0

͵

(Ϫ60␲ ϩ

2t2)

␪1 ϭ [Ϫ60␲t ϩ 2 t3]0
3

ᕢ

–30π

2

4

θ1

6

8

10 12 14
Time t, s

–60π

9.71

0

0
0

θ2

9.71

dt

ᕢ Again note that the minus sign sig-

ϭ Ϫ1220 rad

niﬁes clockwise in this problem.

or N1 ϭ 1220/2␲ ϭ 194.2 revolutions clockwise.
For the second interval

͵

␪2

0

ᕣ

d␪ ϭ

͵

14

9.71

(Ϫ60␲ ϩ 2t2) dt

ᕣ We could have converted the origi-

␪2 ϭ [Ϫ60␲t ϩ 2 t3]9.71 ϭ 410 rad
3
14

or N2 ϭ 410/2␲ ϭ 65.3 revolutions counterclockwise. Thus, the total number of
revolutions turned during the 14 seconds is
N ϭ N1 ϩ N2 ϭ 194.2 ϩ 65.3 ϭ 259 rev

Ans.

We have plotted ␻ versus t and we see that ␪1 is represented by the negative
area and ␪2 by the positive area. If we had integrated over the entire interval in
one step, we would have obtained ͉␪2͉ Ϫ ͉␪1͉.

nal expression for ␣ into the units
of rev/s2, in which case our integrals would have come out directly
in revolutions.

332

Chapter 5

Plane Kinematics of Rigid Bodies

SAMPLE PROBLEM 5/2

C

The pinion A of the hoist motor drives gear B, which is attached to the
hoisting drum. The load L is lifted from its rest position and acquires an upward
velocity of 3 ft/sec in a vertical rise of 4 ft with constant acceleration. As the load
passes this position, compute (a) the acceleration of point C on the cable in contact with the drum and (b) the angular velocity and angular acceleration of the
pinion A.

36″

48″

12″
B
A

Solution. (a) If the cable does not slip on the drum, the vertical velocity and

3 ft /sec

acceleration of the load L are, of necessity, the same as the tangential velocity v
and tangential acceleration at of point C. For the rectilinear motion of L with
constant acceleration, the n- and t-components of the acceleration of C become
[v2 ϭ 2as]

L

4′

a ϭ at ϭ v2/2s ϭ 32/[2(4)] ϭ 1.125 ft/sec2

ᕡ [an ϭ v2/r]

an ϭ 32/(24/12) ϭ 4.5 ft/sec2

[a ϭ Ίan2 ϩ at2]

aC ϭ Ί(4.5)2 ϩ (1.125)2 ϭ 4.64 ft/sec2

Ans.

Helpful Hint

(b) The angular motion of gear A is determined from the angular motion of

ᕡ Recognize that a point on the cable

gear B by the velocity v1 and tangential acceleration a1 of their common point of
contact. First, the angular motion of gear B is determined from the motion of
point C on the attached drum. Thus,

changes the direction of its velocity
after it contacts the drum and acquires
a normal component of acceleration.

[v ϭ r␻]
[at ϭ r␣]

at = 1.125 ft /sec2
C

␻B ϭ v/r ϭ 3/(24/12) ϭ 1.5 rad/sec
␣B ϭ at /r ϭ 1.125/(24/12) ϭ 0.562 rad/sec2

ωB

Then from v1 ϭ rA␻A ϭ rB␻B and a1 ϭ rA␣A ϭ rB␣B, we have
␻A ϭ

rB
18/12
␻ ϭ
1.5 ϭ 4.5 rad/sec CW
rA B
6/12

rB
18/12
␣A ϭ
␣ ϭ
0.562 ϭ 1.688 rad/sec2 CW
rA B
6/12

an = 4.5 ft /sec2

aC

αB

Ans.

18″

αA

6″ v
1
A

ωA

Ans.

a1

B

a = 1.125 ft /sec2

v = 3 ft /sec

SAMPLE PROBLEM 5/3

A

The right-angle bar rotates clockwise with an angular velocity which is decreasing at the rate of 4 rad/s2. Write the vector expressions for the velocity and
acceleration of point A when ␻ ϭ 2 rad/s.

0.3 m
y

Solution.

Using the right-hand rule gives
␻ ϭ Ϫ2k rad/s

and

0.4 m

The velocity and acceleration of A become
[v ϭ ␻ ؋ r]

v ϭ Ϫ2k ؋ (0.4i ϩ 0.3j) ϭ 0.6i Ϫ 0.8j m/s

Ans.

[an ϭ ␻ ؋ (␻ ؋ r)] an ϭ Ϫ2k ؋ (0.6i Ϫ 0.8j) ϭ Ϫ1.6i Ϫ 1.2j m/s2
[at ϭ ␣ ؋ r]

at ϭ 4k ؋ (0.4i ϩ 0.3j) ϭ Ϫ1.2i ϩ 1.6j m/s2

[a ϭ an ϩ at]

a ϭ Ϫ2.8i ϩ 0.4j m/s2

Ans.

The magnitudes of v and a are
v ϭ Ί0.62 ϩ 0.82 ϭ 1 m/s

and

x

ω

␣ ϭ ϩ4k rad/s2

a ϭ Ί2.82 ϩ 0.42 ϭ 2.83 m/s2

Article 5/2

PROBLEMS
Introductory Problems
5/1 The circular disk of radius r ϭ 0.16 m rotates about a
ﬁxed axis through point O with the angular properties
␻ ϭ 2 rad/s and ␣ ϭ 3 rad/s2 with directions as shown
in the ﬁgure. Determine the instantaneous values of
the velocity and acceleration of point A.
ω

Problems

333

5/3 The body is formed of slender rod and rotates about
a ﬁxed axis through point O with the indicated angular properties. If ␻ ϭ 4 rad/s and ␣ ϭ 7 rad/s2, determine the instantaneous velocity and acceleration of
point A.

O

ω

y

α

x

α

0.5 m

A

20°
0.2 m

r

O
y

Problem 5/3
x

5/4 A torque applied to a ﬂywheel causes it to accelerate
uniformly from a speed of 200 rev/min to a speed of
800 rev/min in 4 seconds. Determine the number of
revolutions N through which the wheel turns during
this interval. (Suggestion: Use revolutions and minutes for units in your calculations.)

A
r
–
–
4
Problem 5/1

5/2 The triangular plate
through point O with
cated. Determine the
acceleration of point A.
positive.

α

O

rotates about a ﬁxed axis
the angular properties indiinstantaneous velocity and
Take all given variables to be

ω

y

5/5 The drive mechanism imparts to the semicircular plate
simple harmonic motion of the form ␪ ϭ ␪0 sin ␻0t,
where ␪0 is the amplitude of the oscillation and ␻0 is its
circular frequency. Determine the amplitudes of the
angular velocity and angular acceleration and state
where in the motion cycle these maxima occur. Note
that this motion is not that of a freely pivoted and
undriven body undergoing arbitrarily large-amplitude
angular motion.

x
h

b

A

O

Problem 5/2

θ

Problem 5/5

334

Chapter 5

Plane Kinematics of Rigid Bodies

5/6 The mass center G of the car has a velocity of 40
mi/hr at position A and 1.52 seconds later at B has a
velocity of 50 mi/hr. The radius of curvature of the
road at B is 180 ft. Calculate the angular velocity ␻ of
the car at B and the average angular velocity ␻av of
the car between A and B.

5/10 The bent ﬂat bar rotates about a ﬁxed axis through
point O. At the instant depicted, its angular properties are ␻ ϭ 5 rad/s and ␣ ϭ 8 rad/s2 with directions
as indicated in the ﬁgure. Determine the instantaneous velocity and acceleration of point A.
ω O

y

α

30°
30°

x
0.5 m

G

18″

A

G

105°

A
0.3 m

B

Problem 5/10

Problem 5/6

5/7 The rectangular plate is rotating about its corner axis
through O with a constant angular velocity ␻ ϭ 10
rad/s. Determine the magnitudes of the velocity v and
acceleration a of the corner A by (a) using the scalar
relations and (b) using the vector relations.
z

y
400 mm

ω

300 mm
A

O
B
b
x
Problem 5/7

5/8 If the rectangular plate of Prob. 5/7 starts from rest
and point B has an initial acceleration of 5.5 m/s2,
determine the distance b if the plate reaches an angular speed of 300 rev/min in 2 seconds with a constant
angular acceleration.
5/9 A shaft is accelerated from rest at a constant rate to a
speed of 3600 rev/min and then is immediately decelerated to rest at a constant rate within a total time of
10 seconds. How many revolutions N has the shaft
turned during this interval?

Representative Problems
5/11 The angular acceleration of a body which is rotating
about a ﬁxed axis is given by ␣ ϭ Ϫk␻2, where the
constant k ϭ 0.1 (no units). Determine the angular
displacement and time elapsed when the angular velocity has been reduced to one-third its initial value
␻0 ϭ 12 rad/s.
5/12 The angular position of a radial line in a rotating
disk is given by the clockwise angle ␪ ϭ 2t3 Ϫ 3t2 ϩ 4,
where ␪ is in radians and t is in seconds. Calculate
the angular displacement ⌬␪ of the disk during the
interval in which its angular acceleration increases
from 42 rad/s2 to 66 rad/s2.
5/13 In order to test an intentionally weak adhesive, the
bottom of the small 0.3-kg block is coated with adhesive and then the block is pressed onto the turntable
with a known force. The turntable starts from rest
at time t ϭ 0 and uniformly accelerates with
␣ ϭ 2 rad/s2. If the adhesive fails at exactly t ϭ 3 s,
determine the ultimate shear force which the adhesive supports. What is the angular displacement of
the turntable at the time of failure?

Article 5/2

Problems

335

5/15 Experimental data for a rotating control element
reveal the plotted relation between angular velocity
and the angular coordinate ␪ as shown. Approximate
the angular acceleration ␣ of the element when
␪ ϭ 6 rad.

0.4 m
ω

O
P

10

ω, rad/s

8

6

4

Problem 5/13

5/14 The plate OAB forms an equilateral triangle which
rotates counterclockwise with increasing speed
about point O. If the normal and tangential components of acceleration of the centroid C at a certain
instant are 80 m/s2 and 30 m/s2, respectively, deter¨
˙
mine the values of ␪ and ␪ at this same instant. The
angle ␪ is the angle between line AB and the ﬁxed
horizontal axis.

m
m

θ

150
mm

150 mm

C
A

0
0

2

4

6

8

10

θ, rad

Problem 5/15

5/16 The rotating arm starts from rest and acquires a
rotational speed N ϭ 600 rev/min in 2 seconds with
constant angular acceleration. Find the time t after
starting before the acceleration vector of end P
makes an angle of 45Њ with the arm OP.

B

0
15

2

N
O

6″
P

Problem 5/14
O

Problem 5/16

336

Chapter 5

Plane Kinematics of Rigid Bodies

5/17 The belt-driven pulley and attached disk are rotating with increasing angular velocity. At a certain instant the speed v of the belt is 1.5 m/s, and the total
acceleration of point A is 75 m/s2. For this instant
determine (a) the angular acceleration ␣ of the pulley and disk, (b) the total acceleration of point B, and
(c) the acceleration of point C on the belt.

y
B

A

O

x

45°

v

4″
C
C

A
150 mm

Problem 5/19

v

B
150 mm

5/20 Point A of the circular disk is at the angular position
␪ ϭ 0 at time t ϭ 0. The disk has angular velocity
␻0 ϭ 0.1 rad/s at t ϭ 0 and subsequently experiences
a constant angular acceleration ␣ ϭ 2 rad/s2. Determine the velocity and acceleration of point A in
terms of ﬁxed i and j unit vectors at time t ϭ 1 s.
α

Problem 5/17

5/18 Magnetic tape is being fed over and around the light
pulleys mounted in a computer. If the speed v of the
tape is constant and if the magnitude of the acceleration of point A on the tape is 4/3 times that of point B,
calculate the radius r of the smaller pulley.

200 mm
O

θ

A
y
x

v
Problem 5/20
A

r

5/21 Repeat Prob. 5/20, except now the angular acceleration of the disk is given by ␣ ϭ 2t, where t is in seconds and ␣ is in radians per second squared.
Determine the velocity and acceleration of point A in
terms of ﬁxed i and j unit vectors at time t ϭ 2 s.
B

4″

v

5/22 Repeat Prob. 5/20, except now the angular acceleration of the disk is given by ␣ ϭ 2␻, where ␻ is in radians per second and ␣ is in radians per second
squared. Determine the velocity and acceleration of
point A in terms of ﬁxed i and j unit vectors at time
t ϭ 1 s.

Problem 5/18

5/19 The circular disk rotates about its center O. For the
instant represented, the velocity of A is vA ϭ 8j
in./sec and the tangential acceleration of B is
(aB)t ϭ 6i in./sec2. Write the vector expressions for
the angular velocity ␻ and angular acceleration ␣ of
the disk. Use these results to write the vector expression for the acceleration of point C.

5/23 The disk of Prob. 5/20 is at the angular position ␪ ϭ 0
at time t ϭ 0. Its angular velocity at t ϭ 0 is ␻0 ϭ 0.1
rad/s, and then it experiences an angular acceleration
given by ␣ ϭ 2␪, where ␪ is in radians and ␣ is in
radians per second squared. Determine the angular
position of point A at time t ϭ 2 s.

Article 5/2
5/24 During its ﬁnal spin cycle, a front-loading washing
machine has a spin rate of 1200 rev/min. Once power
is removed, the drum is observed to uniformly decelerate to rest in 25 s. Determine the number of revolutions made during this period as well as the number
of revolutions made during the ﬁrst half of it.

Problems

337

aB
B

800
mm

O

ω

C

vA

0
36 m
m

A

150
mm

O
Problem 5/26

Problem 5/24

5/25 The solid cylinder rotates about its z-axis. At the
instant represented, point P on the rim has a velocity whose x-component is Ϫ4.2 ft/sec, and ␪ ϭ 20Њ.
Determine the angular velocity ␻ of line AB on the
face of the cylinder. Does the element line BC have
an angular velocity?

5/27 A clockwise variable torque is applied to a ﬂywheel
at time t ϭ 0 causing its clockwise angular acceleration to decrease linearly with angular displacement
␪ during 20 revolutions of the wheel as shown. If the
clockwise speed of the ﬂywheel was 300 rev/min at
t ϭ 0, determine its speed N after turning the 20
revolutions. (Suggestion: Use units of revolutions
instead of radians.)
α, rev/s2

1.8

y

0.6
A

P
6″
θ

C

0
0

x

20
θ, rev

B

Problem 5/27
z

Problem 5/25

5/26 The two V-belt pulleys form an integral unit and rotate about the ﬁxed axis at O. At a certain instant,
point A on the belt of the smaller pulley has a velocity vA ϭ 1.5 m/s, and point B on the belt of the larger
pulley has an acceleration aB ϭ 45 m/s2 as shown.
For this instant determine the magnitude of the
acceleration aC of point C and sketch the vector in
your solution.

5/28 The design characteristics of a gear-reduction unit
are under review. Gear B is rotating clockwise with
a speed of 300 rev/min when a torque is applied to
gear A at time t ϭ 2 s to give gear A a counterclockwise acceleration ␣ which varies with time for a
duration of 4 seconds as shown. Determine the speed
NB of gear B when t ϭ 6 s.

B
A

rad
—
α A, —2 CCW
s
8

4

b

0
0

2b

2

6
t, s

Problem 5/28

338

Chapter 5

Plane Kinematics of Rigid Bodies

Tim Macpherson/Stone/Getty Images

5/3

Ski-lift pulley tower near the Matterhorn in Switzerland.

Absolute Motion

We now develop the approach of absolute-motion analysis to describe the plane kinematics of rigid bodies. In this approach, we make
use of the geometric relations which deﬁne the conﬁguration of the body
involved and then proceed to take the time derivatives of the deﬁning
geometric relations to obtain velocities and accelerations.
In Art. 2/9 of Chapter 2 on particle kinematics, we introduced the
application of absolute-motion analysis for the constrained motion of
connected particles. For the pulley conﬁgurations treated, the relevant
velocities and accelerations were determined by successive differentiation of the lengths of the connecting cables. In this earlier treatment,
the geometric relations were quite simple, and no angular quantities
had to be considered. Now that we will be dealing with rigid-body motion, however, we ﬁnd that our deﬁning geometric relations include both
linear and angular variables and, therefore, the time derivatives of these
quantities will involve both linear and angular velocities and linear and
angular accelerations.
In absolute-motion analysis, it is essential that we be consistent
with the mathematics of the description. For example, if the angular position of a moving line in the plane of motion is speciﬁed by its counterclockwise angle ␪ measured from some convenient ﬁxed reference axis,
˙
then the positive sense for both angular velocity ␪ and angular acceler¨
ation ␪ will also be counterclockwise. A negative sign for either quantity
will, of course, indicate a clockwise angular motion. The deﬁning relations for linear motion, Eqs. 2/1, 2/2, and 2/3, and the relations involving
angular motion, Eqs. 5/1 and 5/2 or 5/3, will ﬁnd repeated use in the motion analysis and should be mastered.
The absolute-motion approach to rigid-body kinematics is quite
straightforward, provided the conﬁguration lends itself to a geometric
description which is not overly complex. If the geometric conﬁguration is
awkward or complex, analysis by the principles of relative motion may be
preferable. Relative-motion analysis is treated in this chapter beginning
with Art. 5/4. The choice between absolute- and relative-motion analyses
is best made after experience has been gained with both approaches.
The next three sample problems illustrate the application of absolutemotion analysis to three commonly encountered situations. The kinematics of a rolling wheel, treated in Sample Problem 5/4, is especially
important and will be useful in much of the problem work because the
rolling wheel in various forms is such a common element in mechanical
systems.

Article 5/3

Absolute Motion

SAMPLE PROBLEM 5/4

y

A wheel of radius r rolls on a ﬂat surface without slipping. Determine the
angular motion of the wheel in terms of the linear motion of its center O. Also
determine the acceleration of a point on the rim of the wheel as the point comes
into contact with the surface on which the wheel rolls.

O

The ﬁgure shows the wheel rolling to the right from the dashed to
the full position without slipping. The linear displacement of the center O is s,
which is also the arc length CЈA along the rim on which the wheel rolls. The radial line CO rotates to the new position CЈOЈ through the angle ␪, where ␪ is
measured from the vertical direction. If the wheel does not slip, the arc CЈA must
equal the distance s. Thus, the displacement relationship and its two time derivatives give
s ϭ r␪

s

O′

r θ
C′
s

Solution.

ᕡ

339

C

vO aO
A

α

ω

x

s

Helpful Hints

vO ϭ r␻

Ans.

aO ϭ r␣

˙
where vO ϭ ˙, aO ϭ ˙O ϭ ¨, ␻ ϭ ␪ , and ␣ ϭ ␻ ϭ ␪ . The angle ␪, of course, must
s
v
s
˙ ¨
be in radians. The acceleration aO will be directed in the sense opposite to that of
vO if the wheel is slowing down. In this event, the angular acceleration ␣ will
have the sense opposite to that of ␻.
The origin of ﬁxed coordinates is taken arbitrarily but conveniently at the
point of contact between C on the rim of the wheel and the ground. When point
C has moved along its cycloidal path to CЈ, its new coordinates and their time derivatives become
x ϭ s Ϫ r sin ␪ ϭ r(␪ Ϫ sin ␪)

˙
y v
¨ ϭ ˙O sin ␪ ϩ vO ␪ cos ␪

ϭ aO(1 Ϫ cos ␪) ϩ r␻2 sin ␪

ϭ aO sin ␪ ϩ r␻2 cos ␪

C
O
O

C

˙
y
˙ ϭ r ␪ sin ␪ ϭ vO sin ␪

˙
x v
¨ ϭ ˙O(1 Ϫ cos ␪) ϩ vO ␪ sin ␪

unfamiliar at this point, and their application to the rolling wheel should
be mastered thoroughly.

y ϭ r Ϫ r cos ␪ ϭ r(1 Ϫ cos ␪)

˙
x
˙ ϭ r ␪ (1 Ϫ cos ␪) ϭ vO(1 Ϫ cos ␪)

ᕡ These three relations are not entirely

C

O

C

O

For the desired instant of contact, ␪ ϭ 0 and

ᕢ

x
¨ϭ0

and

y
¨ ϭ r␻2

Ans.

Thus, the acceleration of the point C on the rim at the instant of contact with
the ground depends only on r and ␻ and is directed toward the center of the
wheel. If desired, the velocity and acceleration of C at any position ␪ may be obtained by writing the expressions v ϭ ˙i ϩ ˙j and a ϭ ¨i ϩ ¨j.
x
y
x
y
Application of the kinematic relationships for a wheel which rolls without
slipping should be recognized for various conﬁgurations of rolling wheels such as
those illustrated on the right. If a wheel slips as it rolls, the foregoing relations
are no longer valid.

ᕢ Clearly, when ␪ ϭ 0, the point of
contact has zero velocity so that ˙ ϭ
x
y
˙ ϭ 0. The acceleration of the contact point on the wheel will also be
obtained by the principles of relative
motion in Art. 5/6.

340

Chapter 5

Plane Kinematics of Rigid Bodies

SAMPLE PROBLEM 5/5
The load L is being hoisted by the pulley and cable arrangement shown.
Each cable is wrapped securely around its respective pulley so it does not slip.
The two pulleys to which L is attached are fastened together to form a single
rigid body. Calculate the velocity and acceleration of the load L and the corresponding angular velocity ␻ and angular acceleration ␣ of the double pulley
under the following conditions:

Case (a)
Case (b)

Pulley 1:
Pulley 2:
Pulley 1:
Pulley 2:

r1 = 4″

␻1 ϭ ␻1 ϭ 0 (pulley at rest)
˙
␻2 ϭ 2 rad/sec, ␣2 ϭ ␻2 ϭ Ϫ3 rad/sec2
˙
␻1 ϭ 1 rad/sec, ␣1 ϭ ␻1 ϭ 4 rad/sec2
˙
␻2 ϭ 2 rad/sec, ␣2 ϭ ␻2 ϭ Ϫ2 rad/sec2
˙

d␪ during time dt. From the diagram we see that the displacements and their
time derivatives give

vO ϭ AO␻

aO ϭ AO␣

B
8″

wheel rolling along the ﬁxed line of
the left-hand cable. Thus, the expressions of Sample Problem 5/4 hold.
vB
dsO
A O

With vD ϭ r2␻2 ϭ 4(2) ϭ 8 in./sec and aD ϭ r2␣2 ϭ 4(Ϫ3) ϭ Ϫ12 in./sec , we have
for the angular motion of the double pulley
␻ ϭ vB /AB ϭ vD /AB ϭ 8/12 ϭ 2/3 rad/sec (CCW)

Ans.

␣ ϭ (aB)t /AB ϭ aD /AB ϭ Ϫ12/12 ϭ Ϫ1 rad/sec2 (CW)

Ans.

The corresponding motion of O and the load L is

ᕣ

O

ᕡ Recognize that the inner pulley is a

2

ᕢ

ω 2 r2 = 4″

D

Helpful Hints

dsB

(aB)t ϭ AB␣

dsO ϭ AO d␪

C

L

Case (a). With A momentarily at rest, line AB rotates to ABЈ through the angle

vB ϭ AB␻

2

+

4″

The tangential displacement, velocity, and acceleration of a point on
the rim of pulley 1 or 2 equal the corresponding vertical motions of point A or B
since the cables are assumed to be inextensible.

dsB ϭ AB d␪

ω1

A

Solution.

ᕡ

+

1

B′ vO

B
dθ

aO
(aB)t
Case (a)

ᕢ Since B moves along a curved path, in
addition to its tangential component
of acceleration (aB)t, it will also have a
normal component of acceleration toward O which does not affect the angular acceleration of the pulley.

vO ϭ AO␻ ϭ 4(2/3) ϭ 8/3 in./sec

Ans.

aO ϭ AO␣ ϭ 4(Ϫ1) ϭ Ϫ4 in./sec2

Ans.

ᕣ The diagrams show these quantities

Case (b). With point C, and hence point A, in motion, line AB moves to AЈBЈ

and the simplicity of their linear relationships. The visual picture of the
motion of O and B as AB rotates
through the angle d␪ should clarify
the analysis.

during time dt. From the diagram for this case, we see that the displacements
and their time derivatives give
dsB Ϫ dsA ϭ AB d␪

vB Ϫ vA ϭ AB␻

(aB)t Ϫ (aA)t ϭ AB␣

dsO Ϫ dsA ϭ AO d␪

vO Ϫ vA ϭ AO␻

aO Ϫ (aA)t ϭ AO␣

With vC ϭ r1␻1 ϭ 4(1) ϭ 4 in./sec

vB

vD ϭ r2␻2 ϭ 4(2) ϭ 8 in./sec

aC ϭ r1␣1 ϭ 4(4) ϭ 16 in./sec2

dsA

aD ϭ r2␣2 ϭ 4(Ϫ2) ϭ Ϫ8 in./sec2

A

we have for the angular motion of the double pulley
␻ϭ

ᕤ
␣ϭ

vB Ϫ vA
AB

ϭ

vD Ϫ vC

(aB)t Ϫ (aA)t
AB

AB
ϭ

A′

dsO
O

dsB B′
dθ

vO
vA

(aA)t
aO

B
Case (b)

8Ϫ4
ϭ 1/3 rad/sec (CCW)
ϭ
12

aD Ϫ a C
AB

ϭ

Ϫ8 Ϫ 16
ϭ Ϫ2 rad/sec2 (CW)
12

Ans.

Ans.

The corresponding motion of O and the load L is
vO ϭ vA ϩ AO␻ ϭ vC ϩ AO␻ ϭ 4 ϩ 4(1/3) ϭ 16/3 in./sec

Ans.

aO ϭ (aA)t ϩ AO␣ ϭ aC ϩ AO␣ ϭ 16 ϩ 4(Ϫ2) ϭ 8 in./sec2

Ans.

ᕤ Again, as in case (a), the differential
rotation of line AB as seen from the
ﬁgure establishes the relation between the angular velocity of the pulley and the linear velocities of points
A, O, and B. The negative sign for
(aB)t ϭ aD produces the acceleration
diagram shown but does not destroy
the linearity of the relationships.

(aB)t

Article 5/3

Absolute Motion

SAMPLE PROBLEM 5/6

341

C
b

Motion of the equilateral triangular plate ABC in its plane is controlled by
the hydraulic cylinder D. If the piston rod in the cylinder is moving upward at the
constant rate of 0.3 m/s during an interval of its motion, calculate for the instant
when ␪ ϭ 30Њ the velocity and acceleration of the center of the roller B in the horizontal guide and the angular velocity and angular acceleration of edge CB.

=

y
0.

2

b

m

A
b
x

y

θ

B

Solution. With the x-y coordinates chosen as shown, the given motion of A is
vA ϭ ˙ ϭ 0.3 m/s and aA ϭ ¨ ϭ 0. The accompanying motion of B is given by x and
y
y
its time derivatives, which may be obtained from x2 ϩ y2 ϭ b2. Differentiating gives
y
x

xx ϩ yy ϭ 0
˙
˙

ᕡ

x
y
˙ϭϪ ˙

xx ϩ ˙2 ϩ yy ϩ ˙2 ϭ 0
¨ x
¨ y

x
¨ϭϪ

x

y
Ϫ ¨
y
x

ᕡ Observe that it is simpler to differentiate a product than a quotient.
Thus, differentiate xx ϩ yy ϭ 0
˙
˙
rather than ˙ ϭ Ϫyy /x.
x
˙

x
vB ϭ ˙ ϭ ϪvA tan ␪
vA 2
sec3 ␪
b

Substituting the numerical values vA ϭ 0.3 m/s and ␪ ϭ 30Њ gives
1
΂Ί3΃ ϭ Ϫ0.1732 m/s

Ans.

(0.3)2(2/Ί3)3
ϭ Ϫ0.693 m/s2
0.2

Ans.

vB ϭ Ϫ0.3

aB ϭ Ϫ

The negative signs indicate that the velocity and acceleration of B are both to
the right since x and its derivatives are positive to the left.
The angular motion of CB is the same as that of every line on the plate, including AB. Differentiating y ϭ b sin ␪ gives

˙
y
˙ ϭ b ␪ cos ␪

˙
␻ϭ ␪ ϭ

vA
sec ␪
b

The angular acceleration is
␣ϭ␻ϭ
˙

vA
vA 2
˙
␪ sec ␪ tan ␪ ϭ 2 sec2 ␪ tan ␪
b
b

Substitution of the numerical values gives
␻ϭ

0.3 2
ϭ 1.732 rad/s
0.2 Ί3

␣ϭ

(0.3)2 2
(0.2)2 Ί3

΂ ΃

2

D

Helpful Hint

x
y
˙2 ϩ ˙2

With y ϭ b sin ␪, x ϭ b cos ␪, and ¨ ϭ 0, the expressions become
y

aB ϭ ¨ ϭ Ϫ
x

x

1
ϭ 1.732 rad/s2
Ί3

Ans.

Ans.

Both ␻ and ␣ are counterclockwise since their signs are positive in the sense of
the positive measurement of ␪.

342

Chapter 5

Plane Kinematics of Rigid Bodies

PROBLEMS
Introductory Problems
5/29 The ﬁxed hydraulic cylinder C imparts a constant
upward velocity v to the collar B, which slips freely
on rod OA. Determine the resulting angular velocity
␻OA in terms of v, the displacement s of point B, and
the ﬁxed distance d.

5/32 The small vehicle rides on rails and is driven by the
400-mm-diameter friction wheel turned by an
electric motor. Determine the speed v of the vehicle
if the friction-drive wheel is rotating at a speed of
300 rev/min and if no slipping occurs.
400
mm
N

A

B

800
mm

v

s

v
θ

O

Problem 5/32

5/33 The Scotch-yoke mechanism converts rotational motion of the disk to oscillatory translation of the shaft.
For given values of ␪, ␻, ␣, r, and d, determine the
velocity and acceleration of point P of the shaft.

C
d
Problem 5/29

ω

5/30 Point A is given a constant acceleration a to the right
starting from rest with x essentially zero. Determine
the angular velocity ␻ of link AB in terms of x and a.

A
r

α

O

P

θ

B
b

b

C

a

A
x

d
Problem 5/30

Problem 5/33

5/31 The telephone-cable reel is rolled down the incline by
the cable leading from the upper drum and wrapped
around the inner hub of the reel. If the upper drum is
turned at the constant rate ␻1 ϭ 2 rad/sec, calculate
the time required for the center of the reel to move
100 ft along the incline. No slipping occurs.

5/34 Slider A moves in the horizontal slot with a constant
speed v for a short interval of motion. Determine the
angular velocity ␻ of bar AB in terms of the displacement xA.

ω1

16″

B

24″
L

48″
60°

A
v
xA

Problem 5/31

Problem 5/34

Article 5/3
5/35 The cables at A and B are wrapped securely around
the rims and the hub of the integral pulley as shown.
If the cables at A and B are given upward velocities
of 3 ft/sec and 4 ft/sec, respectively, calculate the velocity of the center O and the angular velocity of the
pulley.

Problems

343

5/37 Determine the acceleration of the shaft B for ␪ ϭ 60Њ
if the crank OA has an angular acceleration
¨
˙
␪ ϭ 8 rad/s2 and an angular velocity ␪ ϭ 4 rad/s at
this position. The spring maintains contact between
the roller and the surface of the plunger.
B

3 ft /sec

4 ft /sec

A

B

B

A

B

20 mm

A
4″
6″

O

80 mm
θ

ω
O

Problem 5/35
Problem 5/37

5/36 The wheel of radius r rolls without slipping, and its
center O has a constant velocity vO to the right. Determine expressions for the magnitudes of the velocity v and acceleration a of point A on the rim by
differentiating its x- and y-coordinates. Represent
your results graphically as vectors on your sketch
and show that v is the vector sum of two vectors,
each of which has a magnitude vO.

5/38 The collar C moves to the left on the ﬁxed guide with
speed v. Determine the angular velocity ␻OA as a
function of v, the collar position s, and the height h.
A

B

y
A

h
θ

r
θ

O

C
vO

v
s
x

xO
Problem 5/36

Problem 5/38

O

344

Chapter 5

Plane Kinematics of Rigid Bodies

5/39 The linear actuator is designed for rapid horizontal
velocity v of jaw C for a slow change in the distance
between A and B. If the hydraulic cylinder decreases
this distance at the rate u, determine the horizontal
velocity of jaw C in terms of the angle ␪.

Representative Problems
5/42 Calculate the angular velocity ␻ of the slender bar
AB as a function of the distance x and the constant
angular velocity ␻0 of the drum.

A

B
L
—
2
θ

L
—
2

C
h
A

L
—
2

L
—
2

r
x
ω0

B
Problem 5/39

Problem 5/42

5/40 The telephone-cable reel rolls without slipping on
the horizontal surface. If point A on the cable has a
velocity vA ϭ 0.8 m/s to the right, compute the velocity of the center O and the angular velocity ␻ of the
reel. (Be careful not to make the mistake of assuming that the reel rolls to the left.)

5/43 The circular cam is mounted eccentrically about its
ﬁxed bearing at O and turns counterclockwise at the
constant angular velocity ␻. The cam causes the fork
A and attached control rod to oscillate in the horizontal x-direction. Write expressions for the velocity
vx and acceleration ax of the control rod in terms of
the angle ␪ measured from the vertical. The contact
surfaces of the fork are vertical.

1.8 m
O

0.6 m

vA

x

A
θ

Problem 5/40

O

b

5/41 As end A of the slender bar is pulled to the right
with the velocity v, the bar slides on the surface of the
ﬁxed half-cylinder. Determine the angular velocity
˙
␻ ϭ ␪ of the bar in terms of x.
B

A

ω

Problem 5/43

5/44 Rotation of the lever OA is controlled by the motion
of the contacting circular disk whose center is given
a horizontal velocity v. Determine the expression for
the angular velocity ␻ of the lever OA in terms of x.

r
θ

x
Problem 5/41

A

A

v

v

B
O
r

x
Problem 5/44

Article 5/3
5/45 Motion of the sliders B and C in the horizontal guide
is controlled by the vertical motion of the slider A.
If A is given an upward velocity vA, determine as a
function of ␪ the magnitude v of the equal and opposite velocities which B and C have as they move
toward one another.

Problems

345

4″

B
10″

A

6″
vA
4″

C

A
Problem 5/47
b

b

b

b

2b
B

5/48 The ﬂywheel turns clockwise with a constant speed
of 600 rev/min. The connecting link AB slides
through the pivoted collar at C. Calculate the angular velocity ␻ of AB for the instant when ␪ ϭ 60Њ.
2b

θ

A

C

θ

8″
θ

C
O

Problem 5/45

B

5/46 Derive an expression for the upward velocity v of
the car hoist in terms of ␪. The piston rod of the
hydraulic cylinder is extending at the rate ˙.
s

16″
Problem 5/48

5/49 For the instant represented when y ϭ 160 mm, the
piston rod of the hydraulic cylinder C imparts a vertical motion to the pin B consisting of ˙ ϭ 400 mm/s
y
and ¨ ϭ Ϫ100 mm/s2. For this instant determine the
y
angular velocity ␻ and the angular acceleration ␣ of
link OA. Members OA and AB make equal angles
with the horizontal at this instant.

b
2b

b
θ

θ

O
200 mm
L

Problem 5/46

5/47 The cable from drum A turns the double wheel B,
which rolls on its hubs without slipping. Determine
the angular velocity ␻ and angular acceleration ␣ of
drum C for the instant when the angular velocity
and angular acceleration of A are 4 rad/sec and
3 rad/sec2, respectively, both in the counterclockwise
direction.

A
y
300 mm
B

C

Problem 5/49

346

Chapter 5

Plane Kinematics of Rigid Bodies

5/50 Link OA has an angular velocity ␻OA ϭ 8 rad/s as it
passes the position shown. Determine the corresponding angular velocity ␻CB of the slotted link CB.
Solve by considering the relation between the inﬁnitesimal displacements involved.

s
v
r
ω

A

C

B
120 mm
320 mm

O
ω OA

Problem 5/52
80
mm
Problem 5/50

5/51 Show that the expressions v ϭ r␻ and at ϭ r␣ hold
for the motion of the center O of the wheel which
rolls on the concave or convex circular arc, where ␻
and ␣ are the absolute angular velocity and acceleration, respectively, of the wheel. (Hint: Follow the example of Sample Problem 5/4 and allow the wheel to
roll a small distance. Be very careful to identify the
correct absolute angle through which the wheel
turns in each case in determining its angular velocity and angular acceleration.)

5/53 Angular oscillation of the slotted link is achieved by
the crank OA, which rotates clockwise at the steady
speed N ϭ 120 rev/min. Determine an expression for
˙
the angular velocity ␤ of the slotted link in terms of ␪.
A
N
B

2.5″

θ

β

O

9″
Problem 5/53

r
O

t

r

R
O

t

5/54 Link OA revolves counterclockwise with an angular
velocity of 3 rad/sec. Link AB slides through the pivoted collar at C. Determine the angular velocity ␻ of
AB when ␪ ϭ 40Њ.
A

R

4″
3 rad /sec

θ

C

O

Problem 5/51

5/52 Film passes through the guide rollers shown and is
being wound onto the reel, which is turned at a constant angular velocity ␻. Determine the acceleration
a ϭ ˙ of the ﬁlm as it enters the rollers. The thickv
ness of the ﬁlm is t, and s is sufﬁciently large so that
the change in the angle made by the ﬁlm with the
horizontal is negligible.

8″

Problem 5/54

B

Article 5/3
5/55 The piston rod of the hydraulic cylinder gives point
B a velocity vB as shown. Determine the magnitude
vC of the velocity of point C in terms of ␪.
C

θ

b

347

᭤ 5/57 One of the most common mechanisms is the slidercrank. Express the angular velocity ␻AB and angular
acceleration ␣AB of the connecting rod AB in terms
of the crank angle ␪ for a given constant crank speed
␻0. Take ␻AB and ␣AB to be positive counterclockwise.

b

B

O

Problems

B
r

l

vB

ω0

θ

b

O

A
A
Problem 5/55
Problem 5/57

᭤ 5/56 The Geneva wheel is a mechanism for producing
intermittent rotation. Pin P in the integral unit of
wheel A and locking plate B engages the radial slots
in wheel C, thus turning wheel C one-fourth of a revolution for each revolution of the pin. At the engagement position shown, ␪ ϭ 45Њ. For a constant
clockwise angular velocity ␻1 ϭ 2 rad/s of wheel A,
determine the corresponding counterclockwise angular velocity ␻2 of wheel C for ␪ ϭ 20Њ. (Note that the
motion during engagement is governed by the geometry of triangle O1O2P with changing ␪.)

᭤5/58 The rod AB slides through the pivoted collar as end
A moves along the slot. If A starts from rest at x ϭ 0
and moves to the right with a constant acceleration
of 4 in./sec2, calculate the angular acceleration ␣ of
AB at the instant when x ϭ 6 in.
x

8″
200/ 2
mm

200/ 2
mm

C

P
B

θ

ω1

O1

O2

ω2

C

B
A
200 mm
Problem 5/56

Problem 5/58

A

348

Chapter 5

Plane Kinematics of Rigid Bodies

5/4

Relative Velocity

The second approach to rigid-body kinematics is to use the principles
of relative motion. In Art. 2/8 we developed these principles for motion
relative to translating axes and applied the relative-velocity equation
vA ϭ vB ϩ vA/B

[2/20]

to the motions of two particles A and B.

Relative Velocity Due to Rotation
We now choose two points on the same rigid body for our two particles. The consequence of this choice is that the motion of one point as
seen by an observer translating with the other point must be circular
since the radial distance to the observed point from the reference point
does not change. This observation is the key to the successful understanding of a large majority of problems in the plane motion of rigid
bodies.
This concept is illustrated in Fig. 5/5a, which shows a rigid body
moving in the plane of the ﬁgure from position AB to AЈBЈ during time
⌬t. This movement may be visualized as occurring in two parts. First,
the body translates to the parallel position AЉBЈ with the displacement
⌬rB. Second, the body rotates about BЈ through the angle ⌬␪. From the
nonrotating reference axes xЈ-yЈ attached to the reference point BЈ, you
can see that this remaining motion of the body is one of simple rotation
about BЈ, giving rise to the displacement ⌬rA/B of A with respect to B. To
the nonrotating observer attached to B, the body appears to undergo
ﬁxed-axis rotation about B with A executing circular motion as emphasized in Fig. 5/5b. Therefore, the relationships developed for circular
motion in Arts. 2/5 and 5/2 and cited as Eqs. 2/11 and 5/2 (or 5/3) describe the relative portion of the motion of point A.
Point B was arbitrarily chosen as the reference point for attachment
of our nonrotating reference axes x-y. Point A could have been used just
as well, in which case we would observe B to have circular motion about
A considered ﬁxed as shown in Fig. 5/5c. We see that the sense of the

A′
y′

r
Δθ

ΔrB

ΔrA

A′

ΔrB

Δ rA / B

x′

B′
Y

Δ rA / B
A″

y

A

r
x

B

Δθ

A

A
r

r

Δ rB / A

X

(a)

Δθ

B

B

Motion relative to B
(b)

Figure 5/5

B′
Motion relative to A
(c)

Article 5/4

rotation, counterclockwise in this example, is the same whether we
choose A or B as the reference, and we see that ⌬rB/A ϭ Ϫ⌬rA/B.
With B as the reference point, we see from Fig. 5/5a that the total
displacement of A is
⌬rA ϭ ⌬rB ϩ ⌬rA/B
where ⌬rA/B has the magnitude r⌬␪ as ⌬␪ approaches zero. We note that
the relative linear motion ⌬rA/B is accompanied by the absolute angular
motion ⌬␪, as seen from the translating axes xЈ-yЈ. Dividing the expression for ⌬rA by the corresponding time interval ⌬t and passing to the
limit, we obtain the relative-velocity equation
vA ϭ vB ϩ vA/B

(5/4)

This expression is the same as Eq. 2/20, with the one restriction that the
distance r between A and B remains constant. The magnitude of the relative velocity is thus seen to be vA/B ϭ lim (͉⌬rA/B͉/⌬t) ϭ lim (r⌬␪/⌬t)
⌬tl0
⌬tl0
˙
which, with ␻ ϭ ␪ , becomes
vA/B ϭ r␻

(5/5)

Using r to represent the vector rA/B from the ﬁrst of Eqs. 5/3, we may
write the relative velocity as the vector
vA/B ϭ ␻ ؋ r

(5/6)

where ␻ is the angular-velocity vector normal to the plane of the motion
in the sense determined by the right-hand rule. A critical observation
seen from Figs. 5/5b and c is that the relative linear velocity is always
perpendicular to the line joining the two points in question.

Interpretation of the Relative-Velocity Equation
We can better understand the application of Eq. 5/4 by visualizing
the separate translation and rotation components of the equation.
These components are emphasized in Fig. 5/6, which shows a rigid body
vA
vB
A

A
vB

=

r

vA / B

vB

vA / B

A

+

ω

r

vA
vB

Path
of B

B

B

B
Path
of A

Figure 5/6

Relative Velocity

349

350

Chapter 5

Plane Kinematics of Rigid Bodies

in plane motion. With B chosen as the reference point, the velocity of A
is the vector sum of the translational portion vB, plus the rotational por˙
tion vA/B ϭ ␻ ؋ r, which has the magnitude vA/B ϭ r␻, where ͉␻͉ ϭ ␪ ,
the absolute angular velocity of AB. The fact that the relative linear velocity is always perpendicular to the line joining the two points in question is an important key to the solution of many problems. To reinforce
your understanding of this concept, you should draw the equivalent diagram where point A is used as the reference point rather than B.
Equation 5/4 may also be used to analyze constrained sliding contact between two links in a mechanism. In this case, we choose points A
and B as coincident points, one on each link, for the instant under consideration. In contrast to the previous example, in this case, the two
points are on different bodies so they are not a ﬁxed distance apart. This
second use of the relative-velocity equation is illustrated in Sample
Problem 5/10.

Solution of the Relative-Velocity Equation
Solution of the relative-velocity equation may be carried out by
scalar or vector algebra, or a graphical analysis may be employed. A
sketch of the vector polygon which represents the vector equation
should always be made to reveal the physical relationships involved.
From this sketch, you can write scalar component equations by projecting the vectors along convenient directions. You can usually avoid solving simultaneous equations by a careful choice of the projections.
Alternatively, each term in the relative-motion equation may be written
in terms of its i- and j-components, from which you will obtain two
scalar equations when the equality is applied, separately, to the coefﬁcients of the i- and j-terms.
Many problems lend themselves to a graphical solution, particularly
when the given geometry results in an awkward mathematical expression. In this case, we ﬁrst construct the known vectors in their correct
positions using a convenient scale. Then we construct the unknown vectors which complete the polygon and satisfy the vector equation. Finally, we measure the unknown vectors directly from the drawing.
The choice of method to be used depends on the particular problem
at hand, the accuracy required, and individual preference and experience. All three approaches are illustrated in the sample problems which
follow.
Regardless of which method of solution we employ, we note that the
single vector equation in two dimensions is equivalent to two scalar
equations, so that at most two scalar unknowns can be determined. The
unknowns, for instance, might be the magnitude of one vector and the
direction of another. We should make a systematic identiﬁcation of the
knowns and unknowns before attempting a solution.

Article 5/4

Relative Velocity

351

SAMPLE PROBLEM 5/7
The wheel of radius r ϭ 300 mm rolls to the right without slipping and has a
velocity vO ϭ 3 m/s of its center O. Calculate the velocity of point A on the wheel
for the instant represented.

A r = 200 mm
0

θ = 30°

O

vO = 3 m/s

r = 300 mm

Solution I (Scalar-Geometric). The center O is chosen as the reference point
for the relative-velocity equation since its motion is given. We therefore write

vA/O

vA

vA ϭ vO ϩ vA/O
60°

where the relative-velocity term is observed from the translating axes x-y attached to O. The angular velocity of AO is the same as that of the wheel which,
from Sample Problem 5/4, is ␻ ϭ vO/r ϭ 3/0.3 ϭ 10 rad/s. Thus, from Eq. 5/5 we
have

˙
[vA/O ϭ r0 ␪ ]

vA2 ϭ 32 ϩ 22 ϩ 2(3)(2) cos 60Њ ϭ 19 (m/s)2

vA ϭ 4.36 m/s

Ans.

The contact point C momentarily has zero velocity and can be used alternatively as the reference point, in which case, the relative-velocity equation becomes vA ϭ vC ϩ vA/C ϭ vA/C where
AC
0.436
(3) ϭ 4.36 m/s
vO ϭ
0.300
OC

vA ϭ vA/C ϭ 4.36 m/s

The distance AC ϭ 436 mm is calculated separately. We see that vA is normal to
ᕣ AC since A is momentarily rotating about point C.

Solution II (Vector). We will now use Eq. 5/6 and write

r

ᕡ Be sure to visualize vA/O as the velocity which A appears to have in its
circular motion relative to O.

ᕢ The vectors may also be laid off to
scale graphically and the magnitude
and direction of vA measured directly from the diagram.

ᕣ The velocity of any point on the
wheel is easily determined by using
the contact point C as the reference
point. You should construct the velocity vectors for a number of points
on the wheel for practice.

paper by the right-hand rule,
whereas the positive z-direction is
out from the paper; hence, the
minus sign.

where
␻ ϭ Ϫ10k rad/s
r0 ϭ 0.2(Ϫi cos 30Њ ϩ j sin 30Њ) ϭ Ϫ0.1732i ϩ 0.1j m
vO ϭ 3i m/s
We now solve the vector equation

ϭ 4i ϩ 1.732j m/s

Helpful Hints

ᕤ The vector ␻ is directed into the

vA ϭ vO ϩ vA/O ϭ vO ϩ ␻ ؋ r0

ᕤ

O

vO
x

C

and may be calculated from the law of cosines. Thus,

vA/C ϭ AC␻ ϭ

y

r0

vA/O ϭ 0.2(10) ϭ 2 m/s

ᕡ which is normal to AO as shown. The vector sum vA is shown on the diagram
ᕢ

A

Ans.

The magnitude vA ϭ Ί42 ϩ (1.732)2 ϭ Ί19 ϭ 4.36 m/s and direction agree with
the previous solution.

352

Chapter 5

Plane Kinematics of Rigid Bodies

SAMPLE PROBLEM 5/8

y

Crank CB oscillates about C through a limited arc, causing crank OA to oscillate about O. When the linkage passes the position shown with CB horizontal
and OA vertical, the angular velocity of CB is 2 rad/s counterclockwise. For this
instant, determine the angular velocities of OA and AB.

A

rA/B

75 mm C

100 mm

rB

rA

Solution I (Vector). The relative-velocity equation vA ϭ vB ϩ vA/B is rewritten

50 mm B
x

O

as

ωCB

250 mm

ᕡ

␻OA ؋ rA ϭ ␻CB ؋ rB ϩ ␻AB ؋ rA/B
Helpful Hints

where
␻OA ϭ ␻OAk

␻CB ϭ 2k rad/s

rA ϭ 100j mm

ᕡ We are using here the ﬁrst of Eqs.

␻AB ϭ ␻ABk

rB ϭ Ϫ75i mm

5/3 and Eq. 5/6.

rA/B ϭ Ϫ175i ϩ 50j mm

Substitution gives
␻OAk ؋ 100j ϭ 2k ؋ (Ϫ75i) ϩ ␻ABk ؋ (Ϫ175i ϩ 50j)
Ϫ100␻OAi ϭ Ϫ150j Ϫ 175␻AB j Ϫ 50␻ABi
Matching coefﬁcients of the respective i- and j-terms gives
Ϫ100␻OA ϩ 50␻AB ϭ 0

25(6 ϩ 7␻AB) ϭ 0

ᕢ The minus signs in the answers indi-

the solutions of which are

ᕢ

␻AB ϭ Ϫ6/7 rad/s

and

␻OA ϭ Ϫ3/7 rad/s

Ans.

cate that the vectors ␻AB and ␻OA
are in the negative k-direction.
Hence, the angular velocities are
clockwise.

Solution II (Scalar-Geometric). Solution by the scalar geometry of the vector triangle is particularly simple here since vA and vB are at right angles for this
special position of the linkages. First, we compute vB, which is
[v ϭ r␻]

vB ϭ 0.075(2) ϭ 0.150 m/s

vB = 150 mm/s

and represent it in its correct direction as shown. The vector vA/B must be perpendicular to AB, and the angle ␪ between vA/B and vB is also the angle made by
AB with the horizontal direction. This angle is given by
tan ␪ ϭ

ᕣ

ᕣ Always make certain that the sequence of vectors in the vector
polygon agrees with the equality of
vectors specified by the vector
equation.

vA/B ϭ vB/cos ␪ ϭ 0.150/cos ␪
vA ϭ vB tan ␪ ϭ 0.150(2/7) ϭ 0.30/7 m/s
The angular velocities become
␻AB ϭ

vA/B
AB

ϭ

cos ␪
0.150
cos ␪ 0.250 Ϫ 0.075

ϭ 6/7 rad/s CW
[␻ ϭ v/r]

␻OA ϭ

vA
OA

ϭ

vA/B

θ

100 Ϫ 50 2
ϭ
250 Ϫ 75 7

The horizontal vector vA completes the triangle for which we have

[␻ ϭ v/r]

vA

0.30 1
ϭ 3/7 rad/s CW
7 0.100

Ans.
Ans.

Article 5/4

Relative Velocity

SAMPLE PROBLEM 5/9

353

B

The common conﬁguration of a reciprocating engine is that of the slidercrank mechanism shown. If the crank OB has a clockwise rotational speed of
1500 rev/min, determine for the position where ␪ ϭ 60Њ the velocity of the piston
A, the velocity of point G on the connecting rod, and the angular velocity of the
connecting rod.

G

10″

A

4″

r = 5″

θ

β

O

Solution. The velocity of the crank pin B as a point on AB is easily found, so
that B will be used as the reference point for determining the velocity of A. The
relative-velocity equation may now be written
vA ϭ vB ϩ vA/B
The crank-pin velocity is

ᕡ [v ϭ r␻]

vB ϭ

Helpful Hints

5 1500 (2␲)
ϭ 65.4 ft/sec
12
60

ᕡ Remember always to convert ␻ to

and is normal to OB. The direction of vA is, of course, along the horizontal cylinder axis. The direction of vA/B must be perpendicular to the line AB as explained
in the present article and as indicated in the lower diagram, where the reference
point B is shown as ﬁxed. We obtain this direction by computing angle ␤ from
the law of sines, which gives
5
14
ϭ
sin ␤ sin 60Њ

␤ϭ

sinϪ1

vA
65.4
ϭ
sin 78.0Њ sin 72.0Њ
vA/B

65.4
ϭ
sin 30Њ sin 72.0Њ

␻AB ϭ

vA/B
AB

ϭ

=
v B 30°

vA ϭ 67.3 ft/sec

θ = 60°

18.02°

A

O

vA

is the quickest to achieve, although
its accuracy is limited. Solution by
vector algebra can, of course, be
used but would involve somewhat
more labor in this problem.

Ans.
10 ″

G 4″
vG/B

vA/B

As seen from the diagram, vG/B has the same direction as vA/B. The vector sum is
shown on the last diagram. We can calculate vG with some geometric labor or
simply measure its magnitude and direction from the velocity diagram drawn to
scale. For simplicity we adopt the latter procedure here and obtain
Ans.

As seen, the diagram may be superposed directly on the ﬁrst velocity diagram.

vB

=

.4
65

ec
ft/s

B

ω AB

A

GB
4
(34.4) ϭ 9.83 ft/sec
vA/B ϭ
14
AB

vG ϭ 64.1 ft/sec

ω
r = 5″

ᕢ A graphical solution to this problem

vG ϭ vB ϩ vG/B
vG/B ϭ GB␻AB ϭ

vB
B

14 ″

We now determine the velocity of G by writing

where

72.0°

Ans.

vA/B ϭ 34.4 ft/sec

34.4
ϭ 29.5 rad/sec
14/12

sec
78.0° vA/B

ft/

vA

The angular velocity of AB is counterclockwise, as revealed by the sense of
vA/B, and is
[␻ ϭ v/r]

.4
65

0.309 ϭ 18.02Њ

We now complete the sketch of the velocity triangle, where the angle between vA/B
and vA is 90Њ Ϫ 18.02Њ ϭ 72.0Њ and the third angle is 180Њ Ϫ 30Њ Ϫ 72.0Њ ϭ 78.0Њ.
Vectors vA and vA/B are shown with their proper sense such that the head-to-tail
sum of vB and vA/B equals vA. The magnitudes of the unknowns are now calculated
from the trigonometry of the vector triangle or are scaled from the diagram if a
graphical solution is used. Solving for vA and vA/B by the law of sines gives

ᕢ

radians per unit time when using
v ϭ r␻.

vG/B

vG
P

ω

354

Chapter 5

Plane Kinematics of Rigid Bodies

SAMPLE PROBLEM 5/10
The power screw turns at a speed which gives the threaded collar C a velocity of 0.8 ft/sec vertically down. Determine the angular velocity of the slotted
arm when ␪ ϭ 30Њ.

C
B

θ = 30°

Solution.

O

The angular velocity of the arm can be found if the velocity of a
point on the arm is known. We choose a point A on the arm coincident with the
ᕡ pin B of the collar for this purpose. If we use B as our reference point and write
vA ϭ vB ϩ vA/B, we see from the diagram, which shows the arm and points A and
B an instant before and an instant after coincidence, that vA/B has a direction
along the slot away from O.

Helpful Hints

ᕢ

ᕡ Physically, of course, this point does

The magnitudes of vA and vA/B are the only unknowns in the vector equation, so that it may now be solved. We draw the known vector vB and then obtain
the intersection P of the known directions of vA/B and vA. The solution gives

18″

not exist, but we can imagine such a
point in the middle of the slot and
attached to the arm.

vA ϭ vB cos ␪ ϭ 0.8 cos 30Њ ϭ 0.693 ft/sec
[␻ ϭ v/r]

␻ϭ

vA
OA

ϭ

0.693

ϭ 0.400 rad/sec CCW

A

B

(18 )/cos 30Њ
12
Ans.

A

B

We note the difference between this problem of constrained sliding contact between two links and the three preceding sample problems of relative velocity,
where no sliding contact occurred and where the points A and B were located on
the same rigid body in each case.

ω

O

ᕢ Always identify the knowns and unknowns before attempting the solution of a vector equation.

vA
P

30° vB = 0.8 ft/sec

vA/B

Article 5/4

PROBLEMS
Introductory Problems
5/59 Bar AB moves on the horizontal surface. Its mass
center has a velocity vG ϭ 2 m/s directed parallel to
the y-axis and the bar has a counterclockwise (as
seen from above) angular velocity ␻ ϭ 4 rad/s. Determine the velocity of point B.

Problems

355

5/61 The speed of the center of the earth as it orbits the
sun is v ϭ 107 257 km/h, and the absolute angular
velocity of the earth about its north-south spin axis
is ␻ ϭ 7.292(10Ϫ5) rad/s. Use the value R ϭ 6371 km
for the radius of the earth and determine the velocities of points A, B, C, and D, all of which are on the
equator. The inclination of the axis of the earth is
neglected.
y

z
v
y

x

A

0.4 m

0.4 m

Sunlight

A
ω

G

B
vG

30°

D

N

B

x

ω

Problem 5/59
C

5/60 The cart has a velocity of 4 ft/sec to the right. Determine the angular speed N of the wheel so that point
A on the top of the rim has a velocity (a) equal to
4 ft/sec to the left, (b) equal to zero, and (c) equal to
8 ft/sec to the right.
A
10″
O

Problem 5/61

5/62 A control element in a special-purpose mechanism undergoes motion in the plane of the ﬁgure. If the
velocity of B with respect to A has a magnitude of
0.926 m/s at a certain instant, what is the corresponding magnitude of the velocity of C with respect to D?

B

70 mm

C

B
vC = 4 ft /sec

C

50 mm

80 mm

D
Problem 5/60
A
Problem 5/62

356

Chapter 5

Plane Kinematics of Rigid Bodies

5/63 End A of the 24-in. link has a velocity of 10 ft/sec in
the direction shown. At the same instant end B has a
velocity whose magnitude is 12 ft/sec as indicated.
Find the angular velocity ␻ of the link in two ways.

5/66 Determine the angular velocity of the telescoping
link AB for the position shown where the driving
links have the angular velocities indicated.
150

B

β

C
2 rad/s

vB = 12 ft/sec
vA = 10 ft/sec

45

24″
B

30°

165

A
Dimensions
in millimeters

Problem 5/63
60

5/64 The circular disk of radius 0.2 m is released very
near the horizontal surface with a velocity of its center vO ϭ 0.7 m/s to the right and a clockwise angular
velocity ␻ ϭ 2 rad/s. Determine the velocities of
points A and P of the disk. Describe the motion upon
contact with the ground.
y

ω

O

A
2 rad/s
Problem 5/66

5/67 The ends of bar AB are conﬁned to the circular slot.
By the method of this article, determine the angular
velocity ␻ of the bar if the velocity of end A is
0.3 m/s as shown.

x
0.2 m
O

A

vO
0.3 m/s
0.8 m

P
O
45°
Problem 5/64

5/65 For the instant represented the curved link has a
counterclockwise angular velocity of 4 rad/s, and the
roller at B has a velocity of 40 mm/s along the constraining surface as shown. Determine the magnitude vA of the velocity of A.
A

20 mm
45°

B

Problem 5/65

vB

B

Problem 5/67

A

Article 5/4
5/68 The two pulleys are riveted together to form a single
rigid unit, and each of the two cables is securely
wrapped around its respective pulley. If point A on
the hoisting cable has a velocity v ϭ 0.9 m/s, determine the magnitudes of the velocity of point O and
the velocity of point B on the larger pulley for the
position shown.

Problems

357

5/70 The magnitude of the absolute velocity of point A on
the automobile tire is 12 m/s when A is in the position shown. What are the corresponding velocity vO
of the car and the angular velocity ␻ of the wheel?
(The wheel rolls without slipping.)

A

650 mm

v

v0

O

A
B
Problem 5/70

180
mm

5/71 For the instant represented point B crosses the horizontal axis through point O with a downward velocity v ϭ 0.6 m/s. Determine the corresponding value
of the angular velocity ␻OA of link OA.

O
90
mm

A
L

90

m

m
30

1

m

m

v
Problem 5/68

O
B

5/69 The right-angle link AB has a clockwise angular
velocity of 3 rad/sec at the instant when ␪ ϭ 60Њ.
Express the velocity of A with respect to B in vector
notation for this instant.

5″

A

12″

180 mm
Problem 5/71

5/72 The circular disk rolls without slipping with a clockwise angular velocity ␻ ϭ 4 rad/s. For the instant
represented, write the vector expressions for the velocity of A with respect to B and for the velocity of P.

3 rad/sec
θ

A

y
x

B

Problem 5/69

ω = 4 rad/s

200
mm
P

B

O

y

300 mm
C

Problem 5/72

x

358

Chapter 5

Plane Kinematics of Rigid Bodies

Representative Problems
5/73 At the instant represented, the velocity of point A of
the 1.2-m bar is 3 m/s to the right. Determine the
speed vB of point B and the angular velocity ␻ of the
bar. The diameter of the small end wheels may be
neglected.

5/76 Determine the angular velocity ␻AB of link AB and
the velocity vB of collar B for the instant represented. Assume the quantities ␻0 and r to be known.
ω0

A
2r

r
0.5 m

60°

45°

O

B

B
1.2 m
A

vA
Problem 5/76

Problem 5/73

5/74 For an interval of its motion the piston rod of the
hydraulic cylinder has a velocity vA ϭ 4 ft/sec as
shown. At a certain instant ␪ ϭ ␤ ϭ 60Њ. For this instant determine the angular velocity ␻BC of link BC.

5/77 Determine the angular velocity ␻AB of link AB and
the velocity vB of collar B for the instant represented.
Assume the quantities ␻0 and r to be known.
ω0

B

A

B

r

10″

β

2r

O

45°
30°

20″
C

D

θ

A

Problem 5/77
vA
Problem 5/74

5/75 Each of the sliding bars A and B engages its respective rim of the two riveted wheels without slipping.
Determine the magnitude of the velocity of point P
for the position shown.

A

100
mm
O

5/78 Motion of the threaded collars A and B is controlled
by the rotation of their respective lead screws. If A
has a velocity to the right of 3 in./sec and B has a
velocity to the left of 2 in./sec when x ϭ 6 in., determine the angular velocity ␻ of ACD at this instant.
3″

vA = 0.8 m /s

D

C

6″

4″
P
160 mm
B

A

x

vB = 0.6 m /s
Problem 5/78
Problem 5/75

B

Article 5/4
5/79 At the instant represented the triangular plate ABD
has a clockwise angular velocity of 3 rad/sec. For this
instant determine the angular velocity ␻BC of link BC.
D

Problems

359

5/81 The ends of the 0.4-m slender bar remain in contact
with their respective support surfaces. If end B has a
velocity vB ϭ 0.5 m/s in the direction shown, determine the angular velocity of the bar and the velocity
of end A.

5″
B
A
5″
3″

5″
O

3″

30°

C
A

0.4 m

7″
Problem 5/79
105°

5/80 For the instant represented, crank OB has a clockwise angular velocity ␻ ϭ 0.8 rad/sec and is passing
the horizontal position. Determine the corresponding velocity of the guide roller A in the 20° slot and
the velocity of point C midway between A and B.

B
vB = 0.5 m/s

Problem 5/81
10″

O

B

ω
C

20″

5/82 End A of the link has a downward velocity vA of
2 m/s during an interval of its motion. For the position where ␪ ϭ 30Њ determine the angular velocity ␻
of AB and the velocity vG of the midpoint G of the
link. Solve the relative-velocity equations, ﬁrst,
using the geometry of the vector polygon and, second, using vector algebra.
y

A

20°
A

Problem 5/80
200 mm
G
x

θ

B

Problem 5/82

vA

360

Chapter 5

Plane Kinematics of Rigid Bodies

5/83 Horizontal motion of the piston rod of the hydraulic
cylinder controls the rotation of link OB about O.
For the instant represented, vA ϭ 2 m/s and OB is
horizontal. Determine the angular velocity ␻ of OB
for this instant.
A

5/86 The elements of a switching device are shown. If the
vertical control rod has a downward velocity v of
3 ft/sec when ␪ ϭ 60Њ and if roller A is in continuous
contact with the horizontal surface, determine the
magnitude of the velocity of C for this instant.

vA = 2 m/s

v

θ

160 mm

180 mm

C

B 120 mm O
Problem 5/83

3″
3″

5/84 The ﬂywheel turns clockwise with a constant speed
of 600 rev/min, and the connecting rod AB slides
through the pivoted collar at C. For the position
␪ ϭ 45Њ, determine the angular velocity ␻AB of AB
by using the relative-velocity relations. (Suggestion:
Choose a point D on AB coincident with C as a reference point whose direction of velocity is known.)

θ

A

Problem 5/86

5/87 The Geneva mechanism of Prob. 5/56 is shown again
here. By relative-motion principles determine the angular velocity ␻2 of wheel C for ␪ ϭ 20Њ. Wheel A has
a constant clockwise angular velocity ␻1 ϭ 2 rad/s.

A
8″
C

θ

B

O
B

200/ 2
mm

200/ 2
mm
P

16″
Problem 5/84

θ

ω1

5/85 Determine the velocity of point D which will produce a
counterclockwise angular velocity of 40 rad/s for link
AB in the position shown for the four-bar linkage.

O2

O1

C

B
A
200 mm

D

Problem 5/87

75 mm
B
ωAB

150 mm
O

C

A

100 mm

100 mm

Problem 5/85

ω2

Article 5/4
5/88 A four-bar linkage is shown in the ﬁgure (the ground
“link” OC is considered the fourth bar). If the drive
link OA has a counterclockwise angular velocity
␻0 ϭ 10 rad/s, determine the angular velocities of
links AB and BC.

Problems

᭤5/90 Ends A and C of the connected links are controlled
by the vertical motion of the piston rods of the hydraulic cylinders. For a short interval of motion, A
has an upward velocity of 3 m/s, and C has a downward velocity of 2 m/s. Determine the velocity of B
for the instant when y ϭ 150 mm.

B
15°

B
250 mm

240 m
m

A

C

80 mm

200
mm

ω0

250 mm

60°
O

y

A

C

Problem 5/88

5/89 The elements of the mechanism for deployment of a
spacecraft magnetometer boom are shown. Determine the angular velocity of the boom when the
driving link OB crosses the y-axis with an angular
velocity ␻OB ϭ 0.5 rad/s if tan ␪ ϭ 4/3 at this instant.

y
A

200

B

mm θ
x

ω OB

120 mm

C
O
120 mm

Problem 5/89

361

200 mm
Problem 5/90

362

Chapter 5

Plane Kinematics of Rigid Bodies

5/5

Instantaneous Center of Zero Velocity

In the previous article, we determined the velocity of a point on a
rigid body in plane motion by adding the relative velocity due to rotation
about a convenient reference point to the velocity of the reference point.
We now solve the problem by choosing a unique reference point which
momentarily has zero velocity. As far as velocities are concerned, the
body may be considered to be in pure rotation about an axis, normal to
the plane of motion, passing through this point. This axis is called the
instantaneous axis of zero velocity, and the intersection of this axis with
the plane of motion is known as the instantaneous center of zero velocity.
This approach provides us with a valuable means for visualizing and analyzing velocities in plane motion.

Locating the Instantaneous Center
The existence of the instantaneous center is easily shown. For the
body in Fig. 5/7, assume that the directions of the absolute velocities of
any two points A and B on the body are known and are not parallel. If
there is a point about which A has absolute circular motion at the instant considered, this point must lie on the normal to vA through A.
Similar reasoning applies to B, and the intersection of the two perpendiculars fulﬁlls the requirement for an absolute center of rotation at the
instant considered. Point C is the instantaneous center of zero velocity
and may lie on or off the body. If it lies off the body, it may be visualized
as lying on an imaginary extension of the body. The instantaneous center need not be a ﬁxed point in the body or a ﬁxed point in the plane.
If we also know the magnitude of the velocity of one of the points,
say, vA, we may easily obtain the angular velocity ␻ of the body and the
linear velocity of every point in the body. Thus, the angular velocity of
the body, Fig. 5/7a, is
␻ϭ

vA
rA

which, of course, is also the angular velocity of every line in the body.
Therefore, the velocity of B is vB ϭ rB␻ ϭ (rB/rA)vA. Once the instantaneous center is located, the direction of the instantaneous velocity of

A

vA

A

vB

B

rA

vA

vB

B

A

vA

C
vB B

rB
C

C
(a)

(b)

Figure 5/7

(c)

Article 5/5

Instantaneous Center of Zero Velocity

every point in the body is readily found since it must be perpendicular to
the radial line joining the point in question with C.
If the velocities of two points in a body having plane motion are parallel, Fig. 5/7b or 5/7c, and the line joining the points is perpendicular to
the direction of the velocities, the instantaneous center is located by direct proportion as shown. We can readily see from Fig. 5/7b that as the
parallel velocities become equal in magnitude, the instantaneous center
moves farther away from the body and approaches inﬁnity in the limit
as the body stops rotating and translates only.

© Peter Jordan_NE/Alamy

Motion of the Instantaneous Center
As the body changes its position, the instantaneous center C also
changes its position both in space and on the body. The locus of the instantaneous centers in space is known as the space centrode, and the
locus of the positions of the instantaneous centers on the body is known
as the body centrode. At the instant considered, the two curves are tangent at the position of point C. It can be shown that the body-centrode
curve rolls on the space-centrode curve during the motion of the body,
as indicated schematically in Fig. 5/8.
Although the instantaneous center of zero velocity is momentarily
at rest, its acceleration generally is not zero. Thus, this point may not be
used as an instantaneous center of zero acceleration in a manner analogous to its use for ﬁnding velocity. An instantaneous center of zero acceleration does exist for bodies in general plane motion, but its location
and use represent a specialized topic in mechanism kinematics and will
not be treated here.

This valve gear of a steam locomotive provides an interesting (albeit not
cutting-edge) study in rigid-body kinematics.

Body centrode

C

Space centrode

Figure 5/8

363

364

Chapter 5

Plane Kinematics of Rigid Bodies

SAMPLE PROBLEM 5/11
The wheel of Sample Problem 5/7, shown again here, rolls to the right without slipping, with its center O having a velocity vO ϭ 3 m/s. Locate the instantaneous center of zero velocity and use it to ﬁnd the velocity of point A for the
position indicated.

A r = 200 mm
0

θ = 30°

O

vO = 3 m/s

r = 300 mm

Solution.

The point on the rim of the wheel in contact with the ground has no
velocity if the wheel is not slipping; it is, therefore, the instantaneous center C of
zero velocity. The angular velocity of the wheel becomes

vA
A

[␻ ϭ v/r]

0.200 m
O

␻ ϭ vO / OC ϭ 3/0.300 ϭ 10 rad/s
120°

0.300 m

The distance from A to C is

ᕡ

C

AC ϭ Ί(0.300)2 ϩ (0.200)2 Ϫ 2(0.300)(0.200) cos 120Њ ϭ 0.436 m
Helpful Hints

The velocity of A becomes

ᕢ [v ϭ r␻]

vA ϭ AC␻ ϭ 0.436(10) ϭ 4.36 m/s

Ans.

ᕡ Be sure to recognize that the cosine
of 120Њ is itself negative.

ᕢ From the results of this problem,

The direction of vA is perpendicular to AC as shown.

you should be able to visualize and
sketch the velocities of all points on
the wheel.

SAMPLE PROBLEM 5/12
A

Arm OB of the linkage has a clockwise angular velocity of 10 rad/sec in the
position shown where ␪ ϭ 45Њ. Determine the velocity of A, the velocity of D, and
the angular velocity of link AB for the position shown.

6″

D

8″

6 2″

6″

θ = 45°

O′

Solution. The directions of the velocities of A and B are tangent to their circular paths about the ﬁxed centers OЈ and O as shown. The intersection of the two
ᕡ perpendiculars to the velocities from A and B locates the instantaneous center C
for the link AB. The distances AC, BC, and DC shown on the diagram are computed or scaled from the drawing. The angular velocity of BC, considered a line
on the body extended, is equal to the angular velocity of AC, DC, and AB and is

B

C
Body extended
14″

14 2 ″
15.23″

[␻ ϭ v/r]

␻BC ϭ

vB
BC

ϭ

OB␻OB
BC

ϭ

6Ί2(10)

Ans.

Thus, the velocities of A and D are
[v ϭ r␻]

vA ϭ

14
(4.29) ϭ 5.00 ft/sec
12

15.23
(4.29) ϭ 5.44 ft/sec
vD ϭ
12
in the directions shown.

A
O′

vB

vD

vA

14Ί2

ϭ 4.29 rad/sec CCW

O

D

B
45°

O

Ans.
Helpful Hint
Ans.

ᕡ For the instant depicted, we should
visualize link AB and its body extended to be rotating as a single unit
about point C.

Article 5/5

PROBLEMS
Introductory Problems
5/91 The slender bar is moving in general plane motion
with the indicated linear and angular properties.
Locate the instantaneous center of zero velocity and
determine the velocities of points A and B.

Instantaneous Center of Zero Velocity

365

5/94 The circular disk of Prob. 5/64 is repeated here. If
the disk is released very near the horizontal surface
with vO ϭ 0.7 m/s and ␻ ϭ 2 rad/s, locate the instantaneous center of rotation and determine the velocities of points A and P of the disk.
y

ω

x

4 rad/s

0.2 m

2 m/s

A

B
G

0.3 m

0.3 m

O

A

vO

Problem 5/91

5/92 The slender bar is moving in general plane motion
with the indicated linear and angular properties.
Locate the instantaneous center of zero velocity and
determine the velocities of points A and B.

4 rad/s
G

0.3 m

B

20°

P

Problem 5/94

5/95 For the instant represented, when crank OA passes
the horizontal position, determine the velocity of the
center G of link AB by the method of this article.

2 m/s

0.3 m

A

A
Problem 5/92

G
90

5/93 The ﬁgure for Prob. 5/83 is repeated here. Solve for
the angular velocity of OB by the method of this
article.
A

90

8 rad/s
O

mm

60
mm

mm

90
mm

B

vA = 2 m/s

Problem 5/95

θ

160 mm

180 mm

5/96 The bar AB has a clockwise angular velocity of
5 rad/sec. Construct and determine the vector velocity
of each end if the instantaneous center of zero velocity is (a) at C1 and (b) at C2.

B 120 mm O
y
Problem 5/93

3″
x

C1
8″

B

5 rad/s
Problem 5/96

4″
A

C2

366

Chapter 5

Plane Kinematics of Rigid Bodies

5/97 The bar of Prob. 5/81 is repeated here. By the method
of this article, determine the velocity of end A. Both
ends remain in contact with their respective support
surfaces.

A

5/99 The linkage of Prob. 5/80 is repeated here. At the
instant represented, crank OB has a clockwise
angular velocity ␻ ϭ 0.8 rad/sec and is passing the
horizontal position. By the method of this article,
determine the corresponding velocity of the guide
roller A in the 20° slot and the velocity of point C
midway between A and B.

10″

O

30°

B
0.4 m

ω
20″

C
105°
B
vB = 0.5 m/s
A

20°

Problem 5/97
Problem 5/99

5/100 Motion of the bar is controlled by the constrained
paths of A and B. If the angular velocity of the bar
is 2 rad/s counterclockwise as the position ␪ ϭ 45Њ
is passed, determine the speeds of points A and P.
P
0

50

5/98 A car mechanic “walks” two wheel/tire units across a
horizontal ﬂoor as shown. He walks with constant
speed v and keeps the tires in the conﬁguration
shown with the same position relative to his body.
If there is no slipping at any interface, determine
(a) the angular velocity of the lower tire, (b) the angular velocity of the upper tire, and (c) the velocities
of points A, B, C, and D. The radius of both tires is r.

m
m

v

B
0

50

2 rad/s

m

m

D

θ

C
A
B

r

A
r
P
Problem 5/98

Problem 5/100

Article 5/5
5/101 Motion of the rectangular plate P is controlled by
the two links which cross without touching. For the
instant represented where the links are perpendicular to each other, the plate has a counterclockwise
angular velocity ␻P ϭ 2 rad/s. Determine the corresponding angular velocities of the two links.

5/103 The mechanism of Prob. 5/74 is repeated here. For
an interval of its motion the piston rod of the
hydraulic cylinder has a velocity vA ϭ 4 ft/sec as
shown. At a certain instant ␪ ϭ ␤ ϭ 60Њ. By the
method of this article, determine the angular velocity ␻BC of link BC.
B
10″

β

P

y

367

Representative Problems

ωP = 2 rad/s

A

Problems

20″
C

D

B
—–
A O = 0.6 m
—–
B D = 0.5 m

0.2 m
O

D

θ

A

vA

x
0.2 m

Problem 5/103

Problem 5/101

5/102 The mechanism of Prob. 5/34 is repeated here. At
the instant when xA ϭ 0.85L, the velocity of the
slider at A is v ϭ 2 m/s to the right. Determine the
corresponding velocity of slider B and the angular
velocity ␻ of bar AB if L ϭ 0.8 m.

5/104 The mechanism of Prob. 5/76 is repeated here. By the
method of this article, determine the angular velocity
of link AB and the velocity of collar B for the instant
shown. Assume the quantities ␻0 and r to be known.
ω0

A
r
B

O

45°

L
Problem 5/104
60°

A
v
xA

Problem 5/102

2r
B

368

Chapter 5

Plane Kinematics of Rigid Bodies

5/105 The mechanism of Prob. 5/77 is repeated here. By
the method of this article, determine the angular
velocity of link AB and the velocity of collar B for
the instant depicted. Assume the quantities ␻0 and
r to be known.

5/107 The sliding rails A and B engage the rims of the
double wheel without slipping. For the speciﬁed velocities of A and B, determine the angular velocity
␻ of the wheel and the magnitude of the velocity of
point P.
vA = 1.2 m /s

ω0

A

2r

A

r
O

P

B

45°
80
mm

30°

O
120
mm

Problem 5/105
B

5/106 The rectangular body B is pivoted to the crank OA
at A and is supported by the wheel at D. If OA has
a counterclockwise angular velocity of 2 rad/s, determine the velocity of point E and the angular velocity of body B when the crank OA passes the
vertical position shown.
40
40 mm
mm

B
E
D
120 mm

A
O

80 mm

vB = 1.8 m /s
Problem 5/107

5/108 Horizontal oscillation of the spring-loaded plunger
E is controlled by varying the air pressure in the
horizontal pneumatic cylinder F. If the plunger has
a velocity of 2 m/s to the right when ␪ ϭ 30Њ, determine the downward velocity vD of roller D in the
vertical guide and ﬁnd the angular velocity ␻ of
ABD for this position.
10
mm 0

E
A

F

θ

B
320 mm
Problem 5/106

20
mm 0

Problem 5/108

D

Article 5/5
5/109 The rear driving wheel of a car has a diameter of
26 in. and has an angular speed N of 200 rev/min
on an icy road. If the instantaneous center of zero
velocity is 4 in. above the point of contact of the tire
with the road, determine the velocity v of the car
and the slipping velocity vs of the tire on the ice.

Problems

369

5/111 The mechanism of Prob. 5/55 is repeated here. By
the method of this article determine the expression
for the magnitude of the velocity of point C in
terms of the velocity vB of the piston rod and the
angle ␪.
C
b

B

O

θ

b

vB

b
A
26″
Problem 5/111
N

Problem 5/109

5/110 The elements of the mechanism for deployment of
a spacecraft magnetometer boom are repeated here
from Prob. 5/89. By the method of this article,
determine the angular velocity of the boom when
the driving link OB crosses the y-axis with an angular velocity ␻OB ϭ 0.5 rad/s if at this instant
tan ␪ ϭ 4/3.

5/112 Link OA has a counterclockwise angular velocity
˙
␪ ϭ 4 rad/sec during an interval of its motion.
Determine the angular velocity of link AB and of
sector BD for ␪ ϭ 45Њ at which instant AB is horizontal and BD is vertical.

D

6″
16″

B
B

A

8″
O

θ

y
A

200

B

mm θ
x

ω OB

120 mm

C
O
120 mm

Problem 5/112

5/113 The mechanism of Prob. 5/84 is repeated here. The
ﬂywheel turns clockwise with a constant speed of
600 rev/min, and the connecting rod AB slides
through the pivoted collar at C. For the position
␪ ϭ 45Њ, determine the angular velocity ␻AB of AB
by the method of this article.

Problem 5/110
A
8″
C

θ

O
B

16″
Problem 5/113

370

Chapter 5

Plane Kinematics of Rigid Bodies

5/114 The hydraulic cylinder produces a limited horizontal motion of point A. If vA ϭ 4 m/s when ␪ ϭ 45Њ,
determine the magnitude of the velocity of D and
the angular velocity ␻ of ABD for this position.
200
mm

D

60
D

m

m

0

B

m

B

E

25

400
mm

v

m
θ

O

θ

90
mm

A
vA
Problem 5/114

75
mm

250
mm

m

O

4 m/s

F
200
mm

100
mm

0

m

A

5/115 The ﬂexible band F is attached at E to the rotating
sector and leads over the guide pulley. Determine
the angular velocities of AD and BD for the position shown if the band has a velocity of 4 m/s.

B

12

Problem 5/116

5/117 In the design of this mechanism, upward motion of
the plunger G controls the motion of a control rod
attached at A. Point B of link AH is conﬁned to
move with the sliding collar on the ﬁxed vertical
shaft ED. If G has a velocity vG ϭ 2 m/s for a short
interval, determine the velocity of A for the position ␪ ϭ 45Њ.

125
mm
O

D
A

0
24

E
D

80

H
m
m

F

Problem 5/115

m
m

θ

20
0m
m
B

5/116 Motion of the roller A against its restraining spring
is controlled by the downward motion of the
plunger E. For an interval of motion the velocity of
E is v ϭ 0.2 m/s. Determine the velocity of A when
␪ becomes 90°.

vG
E

16
0m
m
A

G
Problem 5/117

Article 5/5

Problem 5/119
B

O

O

371

250 mm

θ

100 mm

200 mm

᭤ 5/118 Determine the angular velocity ␻ of the ram head
AE of the rock crusher in the position for which
␪ ϭ 60Њ. The crank OB has an angular speed of
60 rev/min. When B is at the bottom of its circle, D
and E are on a horizontal line through F, and lines BD
and AE are vertical. The dimensions are OB ϭ 4 in.,
BD ϭ 30 in., and AE ϭ ED ϭ DF ϭ 15 in. Carefully
construct the conﬁguration graphically, and use the
method of this article.

Problems

᭤ 5/120 The shaft at O drives the arm OA at a clockwise
speed of 90 rev/min about the ﬁxed bearing at O.
Use the method of the instantaneous center of zero
velocity to determine the rotational speed of gear B
(gear teeth not shown) if (a) ring gear D is ﬁxed
and (b) ring gear D rotates counterclockwise about
O with an angular speed of 80 rev/min.

A

D
a

D
E
F

Problem 5/118

᭤ 5/119 The large roller bearing rolls to the left on its outer
race with a velocity of its center O of 0.9 m/s. At
the same time the central shaft and inner race
rotate counterclockwise with an angular speed of
240 rev/min. Determine the angular velocity ␻ of
each of the rollers.

O
B

a

Problem 5/120

A

372

Chapter 5

Plane Kinematics of Rigid Bodies

5/6

Relative Acceleration

Consider the equation vA ϭ vB ϩ vA/B, which describes the relative
velocities of two points A and B in plane motion in terms of nonrotating
reference axes. By differentiating the equation with respect to time, we
v
v
v
may obtain the relative-acceleration equation, which is ˙A ϭ ˙B ϩ ˙A/B or
aA ϭ aB ϩ aA/B

(5/7)

In words, Eq. 5/7 states that the acceleration of point A equals the vector sum of the acceleration of point B and the acceleration which A appears to have to a nonrotating observer moving with B.

Relative Acceleration Due to Rotation
If points A and B are located on the same rigid body and in the
plane of motion, the distance r between them remains constant so that
the observer moving with B perceives A to have circular motion about B,
as we saw in Art. 5/4 with the relative-velocity relationship. Because the
relative motion is circular, it follows that the relative-acceleration term
will have both a normal component directed from A toward B due to the
change of direction of vA/B and a tangential component perpendicular to
AB due to the change in magnitude of vA/B. These acceleration components for circular motion, cited in Eqs. 5/2, were covered earlier in Art.
2/5 and should be thoroughly familiar by now.
Thus we may write
aA

aA ϭ aB ϩ (aA/B)n ϩ (aA/B)t

A

where the magnitudes of the relative-acceleration components are

=

r

(aA/B)n ϭ vA/B2/r ϭ r␻2

B

aB

v
(aA/B)t ϭ ˙A/B ϭ r␣

Path
of A

Path
of B

(aA/B)n ϭ ␻ ؋ (␻ ؋ r)
(aA/B)t

aA/B

A

+
aB

ω

n

B

aA
aA/B

aB
(aA/B)n

Figure 5/9

(aA/B)t ϭ ␣ ؋ r

(5/9a)

A

α

B

(aA/B)t

(5/9)

In vector notation the acceleration components are

t

aB

(5/8)

In these relationships, ␻ is the angular velocity and ␣ is the angular acceleration of the body. The vector locating A from B is r. It is important
(aA/B)n to observe that the relative acceleration terms depend on the respective
absolute angular velocity and absolute angular acceleration.

Interpretation of the Relative-Acceleration Equation
The meaning of Eqs. 5/8 and 5/9 is illustrated in Fig. 5/9, which
shows a rigid body in plane motion with points A and B moving along
separate curved paths with absolute accelerations aA and aB. Contrary to the case with velocities, the accelerations aA and aB are, in
general, not tangent to the paths described by A and B when these

Article 5/6

paths are curvilinear. The figure shows the acceleration of A to be
composed of two parts: the acceleration of B and the acceleration of A
with respect to B. A sketch showing the reference point as fixed is
useful in disclosing the correct sense of each of the two components of
the relative-acceleration term.
Alternatively, we may express the acceleration of B in terms of the
acceleration of A, which puts the nonrotating reference axes on A rather
than B. This order gives
aB ϭ aA ϩ aB/A
Here aB/A and its n- and t-components are the negatives of aA/B and its
n- and t-components. To understand this analysis better, you should
make a sketch corresponding to Fig. 5/9 for this choice of terms.

Solution of the Relative-Acceleration Equation
As in the case of the relative-velocity equation, we can handle the
solution to Eq. 5/8 in three different ways, namely, by scalar algebra and
geometry, by vector algebra, or by graphical construction. It is helpful to
be familiar with all three techniques. You should make a sketch of the
vector polygon representing the vector equation and pay close attention
to the head-to-tail combination of vectors so that it agrees with the
equation. Known vectors should be added ﬁrst, and the unknown vectors will become the closing legs of the vector polygon. It is vital that
you visualize the vectors in their geometrical sense, as only then can you
understand the full signiﬁcance of the acceleration equation.
Before attempting a solution, identify the knowns and unknowns,
keeping in mind that a solution to a vector equation in two dimensions
can be carried out when the unknowns have been reduced to two scalar
quantities. These quantities may be the magnitude or direction of any of
the terms of the equation. When both points move on curved paths,
there will, in general, be six scalar quantities to account for in Eq. 5/8.
Because the normal acceleration components depend on velocities, it is
generally necessary to solve for the velocities before the acceleration calculations can be made. Choose the reference point in the relative-acceleration
equation as some point on the body in question whose acceleration is either known or can be easily found. Be careful not to use the instantaneous
center of zero velocity as the reference point unless its acceleration is
known and accounted for.
An instantaneous center of zero acceleration exists for a rigid body
in general plane motion, but will not be discussed here since its use is
somewhat specialized.

Relative Acceleration

373

374

Chapter 5

Plane Kinematics of Rigid Bodies

SAMPLE PROBLEM 5/13

ω
α

The wheel of radius r rolls to the left without slipping and, at the instant considered, the center O has a velocity vO and an acceleration aO to the left. Determine the acceleration of points A and C on the wheel for the instant considered.

A
aO

r0

vO

O

r

Solution.

From our previous analysis of Sample Problem 5/4, we know that
the angular velocity and angular acceleration of the wheel are
␻ ϭ vO/r

C

␣ ϭ aO/r

and

θ

t

The acceleration of A is written in terms of the given acceleration of O. Thus,

(aA/O)t = r0 α
A

aA ϭ aO ϩ aA/O ϭ aO ϩ (aA/O)n ϩ (aA/O)t

n

t
O

The relative-acceleration terms are viewed as though O were ﬁxed, and for this
relative circular motion they have the magnitudes
(aA/O)n ϭ r0␻2 ϭ r0
(aA/O)t ϭ r0␣ ϭ r0

΂r΃
vO

θ

΂ ΃

n

O
n
(aC/O)n = r ω 2

Adding the vectors head-to-tail gives aA as shown. In a numerical problem,
we may obtain the combination algebraically or graphically. The algebraic expression for the magnitude of aA is found from the square root of the sum of the
squares of its components. If we use n- and t-directions, we have

(aC/O)t = rα

ϭ Ί[aO cos ␪ ϩ (aA/O)n]2 ϩ [aO sin ␪ ϩ (aA/O)t]2
Ans.

aC ϭ aO ϩ aC/O
where the components of the relative-acceleration term are (aC/O)n ϭ r␻2 directed from C to O and (aC/O)t ϭ r␣ directed to the right because of the counterclockwise angular acceleration of line CO about O. The terms are added together
in the lower diagram and it is seen that
aC ϭ r␻2

aC = rω 2

(aC/O)n = rω 2

The direction of aA can be computed if desired.
The acceleration of the instantaneous center C of zero velocity, considered a
point on the wheel, is obtained from the expression

ᕣ

t
C (aC/O)t = rα

aA ϭ Ί(aA)n2 ϩ (aA)t2

ϭ Ί(r␣ cos ␪ ϩ r0␻2)2 ϩ (r␣ sin ␪ ϩ r0␣)2

aO

(aA/O)n

aO
r

ᕡ and the directions shown.

ᕢ

(aA/O)n = r0 ω 2

aA
(aA/O)t

2

θ

Ans.

aO = rα

Helpful Hints

ᕡ The counterclockwise angular accel-

eration ␣ of OA determines the positive direction of (aA/O)t. The normal
component (aA/O)n is, of course, directed toward the reference center O.

ᕢ If the wheel were rolling to the right
with the same velocity vO but still
had an acceleration aO to the left,
note that the solution for aA would
be unchanged.

ᕣ We note that the acceleration of the
instantaneous center of zero velocity is independent of ␣ and is directed toward the center of the
wheel. This conclusion is a useful result to remember.

Article 5/6

Relative Acceleration

SAMPLE PROBLEM 5/14

375

y

The linkage of Sample Problem 5/8 is repeated here. Crank CB has a constant counterclockwise angular velocity of 2 rad/s in the position shown during a
short interval of its motion. Determine the angular acceleration of links AB and
OA for this position. Solve by using vector algebra.

A
rA/B
100 mm

rB

rA

Solution.

We ﬁrst solve for the velocities which were obtained in Sample
Problem 5/8. They are
␻AB ϭ Ϫ6/7 rad/s

O

75 mm C

50 mm B
x

ωCB

250 mm

␻OA ϭ Ϫ3/7 rad/s

and

where the counterclockwise direction (ϩk-direction) is taken as positive. The acceleration equation is
aA ϭ aB ϩ (aA/B)n ϩ (aA/B)t
where, from Eqs. 5/3 and 5/9a, we may write

ᕡ

Helpful Hints

aA ϭ ␣OA ؋ rA ϩ ␻OA ؋ (␻OA ؋ rA)
3

ᕡ Remember to preserve the order of

3

the factors in the cross products.

ϭ ␣OAk ؋ 100j ϩ (Ϫ7 k) ؋ (Ϫ7 k ؋ 100j)
3 2

ϭ Ϫ100␣OAi Ϫ 100(7) j mm/s2
aB ϭ ␣CB ؋ rB ϩ ␻CB ؋ (␻CB ؋ rB)
ϭ 0 ϩ 2k ؋ (2k ؋ [Ϫ75i])
ϭ 300i mm/s2

ᕢ

(aA/B)n ϭ ␻AB ؋ (␻AB ؋ rA/B)
6

ᕢ In expressing the term aA/B be cer-

6

ϭ Ϫ7 k ؋ [(Ϫ7 k) ؋ (Ϫ175i ϩ 50j)]

tain that rA/B is written as the vector
from B to A and not the reverse.

6 2
ϭ (7) (175i Ϫ 50j) mm/s2

(aA/B)t ϭ ␣AB ؋ rA/B
ϭ ␣ABk ؋ (Ϫ175i ϩ 50j)
ϭ Ϫ50␣ABi Ϫ 175␣AB j mm/s2
We now substitute these results into the relative-acceleration equation and
equate separately the coefficients of the i-terms and the coefficients of the
j-terms to give
Ϫ100␣OA ϭ 429 Ϫ 50␣AB
Ϫ18.37 ϭ Ϫ36.7 Ϫ 175␣AB
The solutions are
␣AB ϭ Ϫ0.1050 rad/s2

and

␣OA ϭ Ϫ4.34 rad/s2

Ans.

Since the unit vector k points out from the paper in the positive z-direction, we
see that the angular accelerations of AB and OA are both clockwise (negative).
It is recommended that the student sketch each of the acceleration vectors
in its proper geometric relationship according to the relative-acceleration equation to help clarify the meaning of the solution.

376

Chapter 5

Plane Kinematics of Rigid Bodies

SAMPLE PROBLEM 5/15

B

The slider-crank mechanism of Sample Problem 5/9 is repeated here. The
crank OB has a constant clockwise angular speed of 1500 rev/min. For the instant when the crank angle ␪ is 60Њ, determine the acceleration of the piston A
and the angular acceleration of the connecting rod AB.

Solution.

The acceleration of A may be expressed in terms of the acceleration
of the crank pin B. Thus,

Point B moves in a circle of 5-in. radius with a constant speed so that it has only
ᕡ a normal component of acceleration directed from B to O.
[an ϭ r␻ ]

΂

5 1500[2␲]
aB ϭ
12
60

΃

2

ϭ 10,280 ft/sec

2

The relative-acceleration terms are visualized with A rotating in a circle relative to B, which is considered ﬁxed, as shown. From Sample Problem 5/9, the
angular velocity of AB for these same conditions is ␻AB ϭ 29.5 rad/sec so that

ᕢ [an ϭ r␻2]

(aA/B)n ϭ

10″

A

4″

r = 5″

θ

Helpful Hints
celeration, aB would also have a tangential component of acceleration.

ᕢ Alternatively, the relation an ϭ v2/r
may be used for calculating (aA/B)n,
provided the relative velocity vA/B is
used for v. The equivalence is easily
seen when it is recalled that vA/B ϭ r␻.
t

14
(29.5)2 ϭ 1015 ft/sec2
12

directed from A to B. The tangential component (aA/B)t is known in direction
only since its magnitude depends on the unknown angular acceleration of AB.
We also know the direction of aA since the piston is conﬁned to move along the
horizontal axis of the cylinder. There are now only two scalar unknowns left in
the equation, namely, the magnitudes of aA and (aA/B)t, so the solution can be
carried out.
If we adopt an algebraic solution using the geometry of the acceleration
polygon, we ﬁrst compute the angle between AB and the horizontal. With the
law of sines, this angle becomes 18.02Њ. Equating separately the horizontal components and the vertical components of the terms in the acceleration equation,
as seen from the acceleration polygon, gives

α AB

(aA/B)t

B
ω AB = 29.5
rad/sec

n
A

(aA/B)n

aA

P

60°

aA ϭ 10,280 cos 60Њ ϩ 1015 cos 18.02Њ Ϫ (aA/B)t sin 18.02Њ
0 ϭ 10,280 sin 60Њ Ϫ 1015 sin 18.02Њ Ϫ (aA/B)t cos 18.02Њ

(aA/B)t
aB = 10,280
ft/sec2

The solution to these equations gives the magnitudes
(aA/B)t ϭ 9030 ft/sec2

and

aA ϭ 3310 ft/sec2

18.02°

Ans.

With the sense of (aA/B)t also determined from the diagram, the angular acceleration of AB is seen from the ﬁgure representing rotation relative to B to be
[␣ ϭ at /r]

␣AB ϭ 9030/(14/12) ϭ 7740 rad/sec2 clockwise

Ans.

18.02°
(aA/B)n = 1015

ft/sec2

If we adopt a graphical solution, we begin with the known vectors aB and

ᕣ (aA/B)n and add them head-to-tail using a convenient scale. Next we construct the

direction of (aA/B)t through the head of the last vector. The solution of the equation is obtained by the intersection P of this last line with a horizontal line
through the starting point representing the known direction of the vector sum
aA. Scaling the magnitudes from the diagram gives values which agree with the
calculated results.
aA ϭ 3310 ft/sec2

and

ω

O

ᕡ If the crank OB had an angular ac-

aA ϭ aB ϩ (aA/B)n ϩ (aA/B)t

2

G

(aA/B)t ϭ 9030 ft/sec2

Ans.

ᕣ Except where extreme accuracy is
required, do not hesitate to use a
graphical solution, as it is quick and
reveals the physical relationships
among the vectors. The known vectors, of course, may be added in any
order as long as the governing equation is satisﬁed.

Article 5/6

PROBLEMS

Problems

377

y

Introductory Problems
5/121 The center O of the wheel is mounted on the sliding
block, which has an acceleration aO ϭ 8 m/s2 to the
˙
right. At the instant when ␪ ϭ 45Њ, ␪ ϭ 3 rad/s and
¨
␪ ϭ Ϫ8 rad/s2. For this instant determine the magnitudes of the accelerations of points A and B.
A
θ

400
mm

800
mm

x

A
θ

aO

O

Problem 5/123

5/124 Refer to the rotor blades and sliding bearing block
¨
of Prob. 5/123 where aO ϭ 3 m/s2. If ␪ ϭ 5 rad/s2
˙
and ␪ ϭ 0 when ␪ ϭ 0, ﬁnd the acceleration of
point A for this instant.

aO

O

B
Problem 5/121

5/122 The 9-ft steel beam is being hoisted from its horizontal position by the two cables attached at A
and B. If the initial angular accelerations are
␣1 ϭ 0.2 rad/sec2 and ␣2 ϭ 0.6 rad/sec2, determine
the initial values of (a) the angular acceleration
of the beam, (b) the acceleration of point C, and (c)
the distance d from A to the point on the centerline of the beam which has zero acceleration.

5/125 The wheel of radius R rolls without slipping, and
its center O has an acceleration aO. A point P on
the wheel is a distance r from O. For given values
of aO, R, and r, determine the angle ␪ and the velocity vO of the wheel for which P has no acceleration
in this position.

R
θ

O

aO

vO

r
15″

P

15″

α1

α2

Problem 5/125

5/126 The circular disk rolls to the left without slipping.
If aA/B ϭ Ϫ2.7j m/s2, determine the velocity and
acceleration of the center O of the disk.

3′

3′
A

A

3′
B

C

Problem 5/122
200 mm

5/123 The two rotor blades of 800-mm radius rotate
counterclockwise with a constant angular velocity
˙
␻ ϭ ␪ ϭ 2 rad/s about the shaft at O mounted in
the sliding block. The acceleration of the block is
aO ϭ 3 m/s2. Determine the magnitude of the acceleration of the tip A of the blade when (a) ␪ ϭ 0,
(b) ␪ ϭ 90Њ, and (c) ␪ ϭ 180Њ. Does the velocity of O
or the sense of ␻ enter into the calculation?

y

150 mm
O
150 B
mm

Problem 5/126

x

378

Chapter 5

Plane Kinematics of Rigid Bodies

5/127 The bar of Prob. 5/81 is repeated here. The ends of
the 0.4-m bar remain in contact with their respective support surfaces. End B has a velocity of
0.5 m/s and an acceleration of 0.3 m/s2 in the directions shown. Determine the angular acceleration of
the bar and the acceleration of end A.

5/129 A car with tires of 600-mm diameter accelerates at
a constant rate from rest to a velocity of 60 km/h in
a distance of 40 m. Determine the magnitude of the
acceleration of a point A on the top of the wheel as
the car reaches a speed of 10 km/h.
5/130 A car has a forward acceleration a ϭ 12 ft/sec2
without slipping its 24-in.-diameter tires. Determine the velocity v of the car when a point P on the
tire in the position shown will have zero horizontal
component of acceleration.

A

30°
P
0.4 m
45°
24″

105°

a

O

v

aB = 0.3 m/s2

B

vB = 0.5 m/s

Problem 5/127

5/128 Determine the acceleration of point B on the equator of the earth, repeated here from Prob. 5/61. Use
the data given with that problem and assume that
the earth’s orbital path is circular, consulting
Table D/2 as necessary. Consider the center of the
sun ﬁxed and neglect the tilt of the axis of the
earth.

Problem 5/130

5/131 Determine the angular acceleration ␣AB of AB for
the position shown if link OB has a constant angular velocity ␻.
B

y
r 2

r

v
A

ω

Sunlight

O
B

D

N

A

x
r

ω

Problem 5/131
C
Problem 5/128

Article 5/6
5/132 Determine the angular acceleration of link AB and
˙
the linear acceleration of A for ␪ ϭ 90Њ if ␪ ϭ 0 and
¨
␪ ϭ 3 rad/s2 at that position. Carry out your solution using vector notation.

A

Problems

379

5/134 The load L is lowered by the two pulleys which are
fastened together and rotate as a single unit. For
the instant represented, drum A has a counterclockwise angular velocity of 4 rad/sec, which is decreasing by 4 rad/sec each second. Simultaneously,
drum B has a clockwise angular velocity of
6 rad/sec, which is increasing by 2 rad/sec each second. Calculate the accelerations of points C and D
and the load L.

500 mm
6″
y

400 mm
y

6″

B
θ

A
x

B
D
x

O

10″

400 mm

20″

C
O

Problem 5/132

Representative Problems

L

5/133 The end rollers of bar AB are constrained to the
slot shown. If roller A has a downward velocity of
1.2 m/s and this speed is constant over a small motion interval, determine the tangential acceleration
of roller B as it passes the topmost position. The
value of R is 0.5 m.
B

Problem 5/134

5/135 The mechanism of Prob. 5/76 is repeated here. The
angular velocity ␻0 of the disk is constant. For the
instant represented, determine the angular acceleration ␣AB of link AB and the acceleration aB of collar B. Assume the quantities ␻0 and r to be known.

1.
5R

ω0

A
R

r
O

45°

A

vA
Problem 5/133

Problem 5/135

2r
B

380

Chapter 5

Plane Kinematics of Rigid Bodies

5/136 Crank OA oscillates between the dashed positions
shown and causes small angular motion of crank
BC through the connecting link AB. When OA
crosses the horizontal position with AB horizontal
and BC vertical, it has an angular velocity ␻ and
zero angular acceleration. Determine the angular
acceleration of BC for this position.

45°

vB
240 mm

C

B

A

r

l
O

120 mm

l
ω

B

A

O

Problem 5/138

Problem 5/136

5/137 The shaft of the wheel unit rolls without slipping
on the ﬁxed horizontal surface. If the velocity and
acceleration of point O are 3 ft/sec to the right and
4 ft/sec2 to the left, respectively, determine the
accelerations of points A and D.

5/139 The velocity of roller A is vA ϭ 0.5 m/s to the right
as shown, and this velocity is momentarily decreasing at a rate of 2 m/s2. Determine the corresponding value of the angular acceleration ␣ of bar AB as
well as the tangential acceleration of roller B along
the circular guide. The value of R is 0.6 m.

y

A

15°
x
aO = 10″
4 ft/sec2

2″
O

vO =
3 ft /sec

2R

B
R

R/2
A
vA

C
D

Problem 5/139
B
Problem 5/137

5/138 The hydraulic cylinder imparts motion to point B
which causes link OA to rotate. For the instant
shown where OA is vertical and AB is horizontal,
the velocity vB of pin B is 4 m/s and is increasing at
the rate of 20 m/s2. For this position determine the
angular acceleration of OA.

5/140 The bar AB from Prob. 5/73 is repeated here. If the
velocity of point A is 3 m/s to the right and is constant
for an interval including the position shown, determine the tangential acceleration of point B along its
path and the angular acceleration of the bar.
0.5 m

60°

B
1.2 m
A

Problem 5/140

vA

Article 5/6
5/141 The center O of the wooden spool is moving vertically downward with a speed vO ϭ 2 m/s, and this
speed is increasing at the rate of 5 m/s2. Determine
the accelerations of points A, P, and B.

Problems

381

B
10″

β

20″
C
0.48 m

A

D

θ

O
P

B

A

vA

y
0.8 m

vO

Problem 5/143

x

Problem 5/141

5/142 Link OA has a constant counterclockwise angular
velocity ␻ during a short interval of its motion. For
the position shown determine the angular accelerations of AB and BC.

5/144 The sliding collar moves up and down the shaft,
causing an oscillation of crank OB. If the velocity of
A is not changing as it passes the null position where
AB is horizontal and OB is vertical, determine the
angular acceleration of OB in that position.

ω
r

A

O

C

r

r

O
A

vA

B

l

r
r 2

B
Problem 5/142

5/143 The linkage of Prob. 5/74 is shown again here. For
the instant when ␪ ϭ ␤ ϭ 60Њ, the hydraulic cylinder gives A a velocity vA ϭ 4 ft/sec which is increasing by 3 ft/sec each second. For this instant
determine the angular acceleration of link BC.

Problem 5/144

5/145 For the linkage shown, if vA ϭ 20 in./sec and is constant when the two links become perpendicular to
one another, determine the angular acceleration of
CB for this position.

C
5″
7″

B
5″

A

vA
Problem 5/145

382

Chapter 5

Plane Kinematics of Rigid Bodies

5/146 The mechanism of Prob. 5/75 is repeated here.
Each of the sliding bars A and B engages its respective rim of the two riveted wheels without slipping.
If, in addition to the information shown, bar A has
an acceleration of 2 m/s2 to the right and there is
no acceleration of bar B, calculate the magnitude of
the acceleration of P for the instant depicted.

v

O
600 mm

A

vA = 0.8 m /s

B
C

A

100
mm

500 mm

90°
P

O
160
mm

θ

B

Problem 5/148
vB = 0.6 m /s

Problem 5/146

5/147 The four-bar linkage of Prob. 5/88 is repeated here.
If the angular velocity and angular acceleration of
drive link OA are 10 rad/s and 5 rad/s2, respectively,
both counterclockwise, determine the angular
accelerations of bars AB and BC for the instant
represented.

5/149 The revolving crank ED and connecting link CD
cause the rigid frame ABO to oscillate about O. For
the instant represented ED and CD are both perpendicular to FO, and the crank ED has an angular
velocity of 0.4 rad/sec and an angular acceleration
of 0.06 rad/sec2, both counterclockwise. For this instant determine the acceleration of point A with respect to point B.
4′

6′

B
A

15°

240 m
m
200
mm

A

F

B

4′

80 mm
ω 0, α 0

12″

60°

C

O

3′
D

3′
C

O

Problem 5/147

5/148 The elements of a simpliﬁed clam-shell bucket for a
dredge are shown. With the block at O considered
ﬁxed and with the constant velocity v of the control
cable at C equal to 0.5 m/s, determine the angular
acceleration ␣ of the right-hand bucket jaw when
␪ ϭ 45Њ as the bucket jaws are closing.

Problem 5/149

E

Article 5/6
5/150 If link AB of the four-bar linkage has a constant
counterclockwise angular velocity of 40 rad/s during an interval which includes the instant represented, determine the angular acceleration of AO
and the acceleration of point D. Express your results in vector notation.

Problems

383

5/152 For a short interval of motion, link OA has a constant angular velocity ␻ ϭ 4 rad/s. Determine the
angular acceleration ␣AB of link AB for the instant when OA is parallel to the horizontal axis
through B.
60 mm

D
y

O

75 mm
B

m

x

0
20

120 mm

ωAB

A

ω

m

150 mm
B
O

C

A
Problem 5/152
100 mm

100 mm

Problem 5/150

5/151 The crank OA of the offset slider-crank mechanism
rotates with a constant clockwise angular velocity
␻0 ϭ 10 rad/s. Determine the angular acceleration
of link AB and the acceleration of B for the
depicted position.

5/153 The elements of a power hacksaw are shown in the
ﬁgure. The saw blade is mounted in a frame which
slides along the horizontal guide. If the motor turns
the ﬂywheel at a constant counterclockwise speed of
60 rev/min, determine the acceleration of the blade
for the position where ␪ ϭ 90Њ, and ﬁnd the corresponding angular acceleration of the link AB.
θ

A
60°

100 mm

B

45°

450 mm
O

O

A

ω0

OA = 75 mm
AB = 225 mm

B
15°

Problem 5/151
Problem 5/153

100 mm

384

Chapter 5

Plane Kinematics of Rigid Bodies

5/154 The mechanism of Prob. 5/115 is repeated here
where the ﬂexible band F attached to the sector at
E is given a constant velocity of 4 m/s as shown.
For the instant when BD is perpendicular to OA,
determine the angular acceleration of BD.

3m
B

3.3 m

E

0.9 m
C

4 m/s
1.95 m

75
mm
B

O

A

200
mm

100
mm
250
mm

D
F

0.6 m
125
mm
O

A
Problem 5/155
E

D
Problem 5/154

᭤ 5/155 An oil pumping rig is shown in the ﬁgure. The ﬂexible pump rod D is fastened to the sector at E and is
always vertical as it enters the ﬁtting below D. The
link AB causes the beam BCE to oscillate as the
weighted crank OA revolves. If OA has a constant
clockwise speed of 1 rev every 3 s, determine the
acceleration of the pump rod D when the beam and
the crank OA are both in the horizontal position
shown.

᭤5/156 A mechanism for pushing small boxes from an assembly line onto a conveyor belt is shown with arm
OD and crank CB in their vertical positions. For
the conﬁguration shown, crank CB has a constant
clockwise angular velocity of ␲ rad/s. Determine
the acceleration of E.
D
200 mm

40

0m

m

E

600
mm
A
B
200
mm

50
mm

C
O

100
mm

100 mm

200
mm
Problem 5/156

Article 5/7

5/7

Motion Relative to Rotating Axes

385

Motion Relative to Rotating Axes

In our discussion of the relative motion of particles in Art. 2/8 and
in our use of the relative-motion equations for the plane motion of rigid
bodies in this present chapter, we have used nonrotating reference axes
to describe relative velocity and relative acceleration. Use of rotating
reference axes greatly facilitates the solution of many problems in kinematics where motion is generated within a system or observed from a
system which itself is rotating. An example of such a motion is the
movement of a ﬂuid particle along the curved vane of a centrifugal
pump, where the path relative to the vanes of the impeller becomes an
important design consideration.
We begin the description of motion using rotating axes by considering the plane motion of two particles A and B in the ﬁxed X-Y plane, Fig.
5/10a. For the time being, we will consider A and B to be moving independently of one another for the sake of generality. We observe the motion of A from a moving reference frame x-y which has its origin
˙
attached to B and which rotates with an angular velocity ␻ ϭ ␪ . We
˙
may write this angular velocity as the vector ␻ = ␻k ϭ ␪ k, where the
vector is normal to the plane of motion and where its positive sense is in
the positive z-direction (out from the paper), as established by the righthand rule. The absolute position vector of A is given by
rA ϭ rB ϩ r ϭ rB ϩ (xi ϩ yj)

Y

A

y

r = rA/B
rA

·

ω =θ

θ

B

rB

X

O
(a)
y

(5/10)

dθ

where i and j are unit vectors attached to the x-y frame and r ϭ xi ϩ yj
stands for rA/B, the position vector of A with respect to B.

dj = – dθ i
dθ x

j

di = dθ j

i

Time Derivatives of Unit Vectors
To obtain the velocity and acceleration equations we must successively differentiate the position-vector equation with respect to time. In
contrast to the case of translating axes treated in Art. 2/8, the unit vectors i and j are now rotating with the x-y axes and, therefore, have time
derivatives which must be evaluated. These derivatives may be seen
from Fig. 5/10b, which shows the inﬁnitesimal change in each unit vector during time dt as the reference axes rotate through an angle d␪ ϭ
␻ dt. The differential change in i is di, and it has the direction of j and a
magnitude equal to the angle d␪ times the length of the vector i, which
is unity. Thus, di ϭ d␪ j.
Similarly, the unit vector j has an inﬁnitesimal change dj which
points in the negative x-direction, so that dj ϭ Ϫd␪ i. Dividing by dt and
˙
i
j
replacing di/dt by ˙, dj/dt by ˙, and d␪/dt by ␪ ϭ ␻ result in

˙ ϭ ␻j
i

and

˙ ϭ Ϫ␻i
j

By using the cross product, we can see from Fig. 5/10c that ␻ ؋ i = ␻j
and ␻ ؋ j ϭ Ϫ␻i. Thus, the time derivatives of the unit vectors may be
written as

˙ϭ␻؋i
i

and

˙ϭ␻؋j
j

(5/11)

x

(b)
z

y

ω
ω×i
x

k
j

ω×j

i

(c)

Figure 5/10

386

Chapter 5

Plane Kinematics of Rigid Bodies

Relative Velocity
We now use the expressions of Eqs. 5/11 when taking the time derivative of the position-vector equation for A and B to obtain the relative-velocity relation. Differentiation of Eq. 5/10 gives
r
r
˙A ϭ ˙B ϩ d (xi ϩ yj)
dt

ϭ ˙B ϩ (x˙ ϩ y˙) ϩ (x i ϩ ˙j)
r
i
j
y
˙
i
j
But x˙ ϩ y˙ ϭ ␻ ؋ xi ϩ ␻ ؋ yj ϭ ␻ ؋ (xi ϩ yj) ϭ ␻ ؋ r. Also, since the
y
x
observer in x-y measures velocity components ˙ and ˙, we see that
x
y
˙i ϩ ˙j ϭ vrel, which is the velocity relative to the x-y frame of reference. Thus, the relative-velocity equation becomes
vA ϭ vB ϩ ␻ ؋ r ϩ vrel

vA/B

y

Y

vrel =
vA/P

ω ×r=
vP/B

A

P (fixed to path
and coincident x
with A)

s
r

ω
rB
O

Path of A
B
X

(5/12)

Comparison of Eq. 5/12 with Eq. 2/20 for nonrotating reference axes
shows that vA/B ϭ ␻ ؋ r ϩ vrel, from which we conclude that the term
␻ ؋ r is the difference between the relative velocities as measured from
nonrotating and rotating axes.
To illustrate further the meaning of the last two terms in Eq. 5/12,
the motion of particle A relative to the rotating x-y plane is shown in
Fig. 5/11 as taking place in a curved slot in a plate which represents the
rotating x-y reference system. The velocity of A as measured relative to
the plate, vrel, would be tangent to the path ﬁxed in the x-y plate and
s
would have a magnitude ˙, where s is measured along the path. This relative velocity may also be viewed as the velocity vA/P relative to a point P
attached to the plate and coincident with A at the instant under consid˙
eration. The term ␻ ؋ r has a magnitude r ␪ and a direction normal to r
and is the velocity relative to B of point P as seen from nonrotating axes
attached to B.
The following comparison will help establish the equivalence of, and
clarify the differences between, the relative-velocity equations written
for rotating and nonrotating reference axes:

Figure 5/11
(5/12a)

In the second equation, the term vP/B is measured from a nonrotating
position—otherwise, it would be zero. The term vA/P is the same as vrel
and is the velocity of A as measured in the x-y frame. In the third equation, vP is the absolute velocity of P and represents the effect of the
moving coordinate system, both translational and rotational. The fourth
equation is the same as that developed for nonrotating axes, Eq. 2/20,
and it is seen that vA/B ϭ vP/B + vA/P = ␻ ؋ r ϩ vrel.

Article 5/7

Motion Relative to Rotating Axes

387

Transformation of a Time Derivative
Equation 5/12 represents a transformation of the time derivative of
the position vector between rotating and nonrotating axes. We may easily generalize this result to apply to the time derivative of any vector
quantity V ϭ Vxi ϩ Vy j. Accordingly, the total time derivative with respect to the X-Y system is

΂dV΃
dt

XY

˙
˙
ϭ (V xi ϩ V y j) ϩ (Vx˙ ϩ Vy˙)
i
j

The ﬁrst two terms in the expression represent that part of the total derivative of V which is measured relative to the x-y reference system, and
the second two terms represent that part of the derivative due to the rotation of the reference system.
i
j
With the expressions for ˙ and ˙ from Eqs. 5/11, we may now write

΂dV΃
dt

XY

ϭ

΂dV΃
dt

xy

ϩ ␻؋V

(5/13)

Here ␻ ؋ V represents the difference between the time derivative of the
vector as measured in a ﬁxed reference system and its time derivative as
measured in the rotating reference system. As we will see in Art. 7/2,
where three-dimensional motion is introduced, Eq. 5/13 is valid in three
dimensions, as well as in two dimensions.
The physical signiﬁcance of Eq. 5/13 is illustrated in Fig. 5/12,
which shows the vector V at time t as observed both in the ﬁxed axes
X-Y and in the rotating axes x-y. Because we are dealing with the effects
of rotation only, we may draw the vector through the coordinate origin
without loss of generality. During time dt, the vector swings to position
VЈ, and the observer in x-y measures the two components (a) dV due to
its change in magnitude and (b) V d␤ due to its rotation d␤ relative to
x-y. To the rotating observer, then, the derivative (dV/dt)xy which the
˙
observer measures has the components dV/dt and V d␤/dt ϭ V␤ . The remaining part of the total time derivative not measured by the rotating
observer has the magnitude V d␪/dt and, expressed as a vector, is ␻ ؋ V.
Thus, we see from the diagram that

˙
˙
(V)XY ϭ (V)xy ϩ ␻ ؋ V
which is Eq. 5/13.

Relative Acceleration
The relative-acceleration equation may be obtained by differentiating the relative-velocity relation, Eq. 5/12. Thus,
r v
aA ϭ aB ϩ ␻ ؋ r ϩ ␻ ؋ ˙ ϩ ˙rel
˙

y

Y

Vdθ
Vdβ

dγ
γ

β

(dV)XY

V′

(dV)xy
d⏐V⏐ = dV
V
·
ω =θ
x

θ

Figure 5/12

X

388

Chapter 5

Plane Kinematics of Rigid Bodies

In the derivation of Eq. 5/12 we saw that
r
i
j
y
˙ ϭ d (xi ϩ yj) ϭ (x˙ ϩ y˙) ϩ (x i ϩ ˙j)
˙
dt

ϭ ␻ ؋ r ϩ vrel
Therefore, the third term on the right side of the acceleration equation
becomes
␻ ؋ ˙ ϭ ␻ ؋ (␻ ؋ r ϩ vrel) ϭ ␻ ؋ (␻ ؋ r) ϩ ␻ ؋ vrel
r
With the aid of Eqs. 5/11, the last term on the right side of the equation
for aA becomes
y
y
v
˙rel ϭ d (x i ϩ ˙j) ϭ (x ˙ ϩ ˙˙) ϩ (x i ϩ ¨j)
˙
˙i y j
¨
dt

ϭ ␻ ؋ (x i ϩ ˙j) ϩ (x i ϩ ¨j)
y
y
˙
¨
ϭ ␻ ؋ vrel ϩ arel
Substituting this into the expression for aA and collecting terms, we obtain
aA ϭ aB ϩ ␻ ؋ r ϩ ␻ ؋ (␻ ؋ r) ϩ 2␻ ؋ vrel ϩ arel
˙

t
Path of A

y

(arel)t

2ω × vrel
n
Y

·
ω ×r

P
A

r

·

ω, ω
rB
O

s

(arel)n

ω × (ω × r)

B
X

Figure 5/13

(5/14)

Equation 5/14 is the general vector expression for the absolute acceleration of a particle A in terms of its acceleration arel measured relative
to a moving coordinate system which rotates with an angular velocity ␻
and an angular acceleration ␻. The terms ␻ ؋ r and ␻ ؋ (␻ ؋ r) are
˙
˙
shown in Fig. 5/13. They represent, respectively, the tangential and normal components of the acceleration aP/B of the coincident point P in its
circular motion with respect to B. This motion would be observed from a
¨
set of nonrotating axes moving with B. The magnitude of ␻ ؋ r is r ␪ and
˙
its direction is tangent to the circle. The magnitude of ␻ ؋ (␻ ؋ r) is r␻2
x
and its direction is from P to B along the normal to the circle.
The acceleration of A relative to the plate along the path, arel, may
be expressed in rectangular, normal and tangential, or polar coordinates
in the rotating system. Frequently, n- and t-components are used, and
these components are depicted in Fig. 5/13. The tangential component
s
has the magnitude (arel)t ϭ ¨, where s is the distance measured along
the path to A. The normal component has the magnitude (arel)n ϭ vrel 2/␳,
where ␳ is the radius of curvature of the path as measured in x-y. The
sense of this vector is always toward the center of curvature.

Coriolis Acceleration
The term 2␻ ؋ vrel, shown in Fig. 5/13, is called the Coriolis acceleration.* It represents the difference between the acceleration of A relative to P as measured from nonrotating axes and from rotating axes.
*Named after the French military engineer G. Coriolis (1792–1843), who was the ﬁrst to
call attention to this term.

Article 5/7

The direction is always normal to the vector vrel, and the sense is established by the right-hand rule for the cross product.
The Coriolis acceleration aCor ϭ 2␻ ؋ vrel is difﬁcult to visualize because it is composed of two separate physical effects. To help with this
visualization, we will consider the simplest possible motion in which
this term appears. In Fig. 5/14a we have a rotating disk with a radial
slot in which a small particle A is conﬁned to slide. Let the disk turn
˙
with a constant angular velocity ␻ ϭ ␪ and let the particle move along
x
the slot with a constant speed vrel ϭ ˙ relative to the slot. The velocity of
x
A has the two components (a) ˙ due to motion along the slot and (b) x␻
due to the rotation of the slot. The changes in these two velocity components due to the rotation of the disk are shown in part b of the ﬁgure for
the interval dt, during which the x-y axes rotate with the disk through
the angle d␪ to xЈ-yЈ.
x
The velocity increment due to the change in direction of vrel is ˙ d␪
and that due to the change in magnitude of x␻ is ␻ dx, both being in the
y-direction normal to the slot. Dividing each increment by dt and adding
give the sum ␻x ϩ ˙␻ ϭ 2x ␻, which is the magnitude of the Coriolis ac˙ x
˙
celeration 2␻ ؋ vrel.
Dividing the remaining velocity increment x␻ d␪ due to the change
˙
in direction of x␻ by dt gives x␻ ␪ or x␻2, which is the acceleration of a
point P ﬁxed to the slot and momentarily coincident with the particle A.
We now see how Eq. 5/14 ﬁts these results. With the origin B in that
equation taken at the ﬁxed center O, aB ϭ 0. With constant angular velocity, ␻ ؋ r ϭ 0. With vrel constant in magnitude and no curvature to
˙
the slot, arel ϭ 0. We are left with

Motion Relative to Rotating Axes

Y
y

ω = constant
xω

x
A

O

·
vrel = x = constant
X

x

(a)

y′

y
d(xω ) = ω dx + x dω
= ω dx + 0

xω dθ

xω
·
vrel = x

dθ
dθ

aA ϭ Ϫx␻2i ϩ 2x ␻j
˙

(b)

which checks our analysis from Fig. 5/14.
We also note that this same result is contained in our polar-coordinate
r
analysis of plane curvilinear motion in Eq. 2/14 when we let ¨ ϭ 0 and
¨
˙
␪ ϭ 0 and replace r by x and ␪ by ␻. If the slot in the disk of Fig. 5/14
had been curved, we would have had a normal component of acceleration relative to the slot so that arel would not be zero.

Rotating versus Nonrotating Systems
The following comparison will help to establish the equivalence of,
and clarify the differences between, the relative-acceleration equations
written for rotating and nonrotating reference axes:

(5/14a)

x′
·
x dθ

aA ϭ ␻ ؋ (␻ ؋ r) ϩ 2␻ ؋ vrel
Replacing r by xi, ␻ by ␻k, and vrel by ˙i gives
x

389

Figure 5/14

x

390

Chapter 5

Plane Kinematics of Rigid Bodies

The equivalence of aP/B and ␻ ؋ r ϩ ␻ ؋ (␻ ؋ r), as shown in the sec˙
ond equation, has already been described. From the third equation
where aB ϩ aP/B has been combined to give aP, it is seen that the relative-acceleration term aA/P, unlike the corresponding relative-velocity
term, is not equal to the relative acceleration arel measured from the rotating x-y frame of reference.
The Coriolis term is, therefore, the difference between the acceleration aA/P of A relative to P as measured in a nonrotating system and the
acceleration arel of A relative to P as measured in a rotating system.
From the fourth equation, it is seen that the acceleration aA/B of A with
respect to B as measured in a nonrotating system, Eq. 2/21, is a combination of the last four terms in the ﬁrst equation for the rotating system.
The results expressed by Eq. 5/14 may be visualized somewhat more
simply by writing the acceleration of A in terms of the acceleration of the
coincident point P. Because the acceleration of P is aP ϭ aB ϩ ␻ ؋ r ϩ
˙
␻ ؋ (␻ ؋ r), we may rewrite Eq. 5/14 as
aA ϭ aP ϩ 2␻ ؋ vrel ϩ arel

(5/14b)

When the equation is written in this form, point P may not be picked at
random because it is the one point attached to the rotating reference
frame coincident with A at the instant of analysis. Again, reference to
Fig. 5/13 should be made to clarify the meaning of each of the terms in
Eq. 5/14 and its equivalent, Eq. 5/14b.

KEY CONCEPTS
In summary, once we have chosen our rotating reference system,
we must recognize the following quantities in Eqs. 5/12 and 5/14:
vB ϭ absolute velocity of the origin B of the rotating axes
aB ϭ absolute acceleration of the origin B of the rotating axes
r ϭ position vector of the coincident point P measured from B
␻ ϭ angular velocity of the rotating axes
␻ ϭ angular acceleration of the rotating axes
˙
vrel ϭ velocity of A measured relative to the rotating axes
arel ϭ acceleration of A measured relative to the rotating axes

Also, keep in mind that our vector analysis depends on the consistent use of a right-handed set of coordinate axes. Finally, note that Eqs.
5/12 and 5/14, developed here for plane motion, hold equally well for
space motion. The extension to space motion will be covered in Art. 7/6.

Article 5/7

SAMPLE PROBLEM 5/16

Motion Relative to Rotating Axes

391

ω = 4 rad /sec

At the instant represented, the disk with the radial slot is rotating about O
with a counterclockwise angular velocity of 4 rad/sec which is decreasing at the
rate of 10 rad/sec2. The motion of slider A is separately controlled, and at this instant, r ϭ 6 in., ˙ ϭ 5 in./sec, and ¨ ϭ 81 in./sec2. Determine the absolute velocr
r
ity and acceleration of A for this position.

·
ω = 10 rad/sec2

O

r

A

Solution.

We have motion relative to a rotating path, so that a rotating coordinate system with origin at O is indicated. We attach x-y axes to the disk and
use the unit vectors i and j.

Velocity. With the origin at O, the term vB of Eq. 5/12 disappears and we have
Helpful Hints

ᕡ

vA ϭ ␻ ؋ r ϩ vrel

ᕡ This equation is the same as vA ϭ

ᕢ The angular velocity as a vector is ␻ ϭ 4k rad/sec, where k is the unit vector normal to the x-y plane in the ϩz-direction. Our relative-velocity equation becomes
vA ϭ 4k ؋ 6i ϩ 5i ϭ 24j ϩ 5i in./sec

Ans.

vP ϩ vA/P, where P is a point attached to the disk coincident with A
at this instant.

ᕢ Note that the x-y-z axes chosen constitute a right-handed system.

in the direction indicated and has the magnitude
Ans.

ᕣ Be sure to recognize that ␻ ϫ (␻ ؋ r)
and ␻ ؋ r represent the normal and
˙

Equation 5/14 written for zero acceleration of the origin of the
rotating coordinate system is

tangential components of acceleration of a point P on the disk coincident with A. This description becomes
that of Eq. 5/14b.

vA ϭ Ί(24)2 ϩ (5)2 ϭ 24.5 in./sec

Acceleration.

aA ϭ ␻ ؋ (␻ ؋ r) ϩ ␻ ؋ r ϩ 2␻ ؋ vrel ϩ arel
˙
The terms become

ᕣ

j

␻ ؋ (␻ ؋ r) ϭ 4k ؋ (4k ؋ 6i) ϭ 4k ؋ 24j ϭ Ϫ96i in./sec2

y

␻ ؋ r ϭ Ϫ10k ؋ 6i ϭ Ϫ60j in./sec2
˙

O
v ër
vA

2␻ ؋ vrel ϭ 2(4k) ؋ 5i ϭ 40j in./sec

2

arel ϭ 81i in./sec2

A

The total acceleration is, therefore,
aA ϭ (81 Ϫ96)i ϩ (40 Ϫ 60)j ϭ Ϫ15i Ϫ 20j in./sec2

vrel

y

Ans.

x

O
2 v ë vrel

v ë (v ë r)

in the direction indicated and has the magnitude

i

aA

aA ϭ Ί(15)2 ϩ (20)2 ϭ 25 in./sec2

Ans.

Vector notation is certainly not essential to the solution of this problem.
The student should be able to work out the steps with scalar notation just as easily. The correct direction of the Coriolis-acceleration term can always be found
by the direction in which the head of the vrel vector would move if rotated about
its tail in the sense of ␻ as shown.

·
vër

A

arel

v

x
aCor

vrel

392

Chapter 5

Plane Kinematics of Rigid Bodies

SAMPLE PROBLEM 5/17

y

The pin A of the hinged link AC is conﬁned to move in the rotating slot of
link OD. The angular velocity of OD is ␻ ϭ 2 rad/s clockwise and is constant for
the interval of motion concerned. For the position where ␪ ϭ 45Њ with AC horizontal, determine the velocity of pin A and the velocity of A relative to the rotating slot in OD.

450 mm

θ = 45°

O

225 mm

ω = 2 rad/s
225 mm

Solution.

Motion of a point (pin A) along a rotating path (the slot) suggests
the use of rotating coordinate axes x-y attached to arm OD. With the origin at the
ﬁxed point O, the term vB of Eq. 5/12 vanishes, and we have vA ϭ ␻ ؋ r ϩ vrel.
The velocity of A in its circular motion about C is

A

C
D
x

vA ϭ ␻CA ؋ rCA ϭ ␻CAk ؋ (225/Ί2)(Ϫi Ϫ j) ϭ (225/Ί2)␻CA (i Ϫ j)

O

␻ ؋ r ϭ 2k ؋ 225Ί2i ϭ 450Ί2j mm/s

re

v
A/

P

=

A
P P
A P
A

C

v

positive z-direction (ϩk).
The angular velocity ␻ of the rotating axes is that of the arm OD and, by the
right-hand rule, is ␻ ϭ ␻k ϭ 2k rad/s. The vector from the origin to the point P on
OD coincident with A is r ϭ OPi ϭ Ί(450 Ϫ 225)2 ϩ (225)2 i ϭ 225Ί2i mm. Thus,

l

ᕡ where the angular velocity ␻CA is arbitrarily assigned in a clockwise sense in the

vA

Finally, the relative-velocity term vrel is the velocity measured by an observer attached to the rotating reference frame and is vrel ϭ ˙i. Substitution into
x
the relative-velocity equation gives

ᕡ It is clear enough physically that CA
will have a counterclockwise angular
velocity for the conditions speciﬁed, so
we anticipate a negative value for ␻CA.

Equating separately the coefﬁcients of the i and j terms yields
and

Ϫ(225/Ί2)␻CA ϭ 450Ί2

ᕢ Solution of the problem is not re-

giving
␻CA ϭ Ϫ4 rad/s

and

x
˙ ϭ vrel ϭ Ϫ450Ί2 mm/s

Ans.

With a negative value for ␻CA, the actual angular velocity of CA is counterclockwise, so the velocity of A is up with a magnitude of

ᕢ

vA ϭ 225(4) ϭ 900 mm/s

Ans.

Geometric clariﬁcation of the terms is helpful and is easily shown. Using
the equivalence between the third and the ﬁrst of Eqs. 5/12a with vB ϭ 0 enables
us to write vA ϭ vP ϩ vA/P, where P is the point on the rotating arm OD coincident with A. Clearly, vP ϭ OP␻ ϭ 225Ί2(2) = 450Ί2 mm/s and its direction is
normal to OD. The relative velocity vA/P, which is the same as vrel, is seen from the
ﬁgure to be along the slot toward O. This conclusion becomes clear when it is observed that A is approaching P along the slot from below before coincidence and is
receding from P upward along the slot following coincidence. The velocity of A is
tangent to its circular arc about C. The vector equation can now be satisﬁed since
there are only two remaining scalar unknowns, namely, the magnitude of vA/P and
the magnitude of vA. For the 45Њ position, the ﬁgure requires vA/P ϭ 450Ί2 mm/s
and vA ϭ 900 mm/s, each in its direction shown. The angular velocity of AC is
[␻ ϭ v/r]

45°

Helpful Hints

(225/Ί2)␻CA (i Ϫ j) ϭ 450Ί2j ϩ ˙i
x

(225/Ί2)␻CA ϭ ˙
x

vP = v ë r

␻AC ϭ vA / AC ϭ 900/225 ϭ 4 rad/s counterclockwise

stricted to the reference axes used. Alternatively, the origin of the x-y axes,
still attached to OD, could be chosen
at the coincident point P on OD. This
choice would merely replace the ␻ ؋ r
term by its equal, vP. As a further selection, all vector quantities could be
expressed in terms of X-Y components using unit vectors I and J.
y

Y

j

J

θ
X

θ
x

O

I

θ
i

A direct conversion between the two
reference systems is obtained from the
geometry of the unit circle and gives
i ϭ I cos ␪ Ϫ J sin ␪
and
j ϭ I sin ␪ ϩ J cos ␪

Article 5/7

Motion Relative to Rotating Axes

SAMPLE PROBLEM 5/18

y

For the conditions of Sample Problem 5/17, determine the angular acceleration of AC and the acceleration of A relative to the rotating slot in arm OD.

450 mm

Solution.

We attach the rotating coordinate system x-y to arm OD and use Eq.
5/14. With the origin at the ﬁxed point O, the term aB becomes zero so that
aA ϭ ␻ ؋ r ϩ ␻ ؋ (␻ ؋ r) ϩ 2␻ ؋ vrel ϩ arel
˙

θ = 45°
225 mm
225 mm

Ί2

΂

(Ϫi Ϫ j) Ϫ 4k ؋ Ϫ4k ؋

A

C

aA ϭ ␻CA ؋ rCA ϩ ␻CA ؋ (␻CA ؋ rCA)
˙
225

225
Ί2

[Ϫi Ϫ j]

O

ω = 2 rad /s

From the solution to Sample Problem 5/17, we make use of the values ␻ ϭ 2k
rad/s, ␻CA ϭ Ϫ4k rad/s, and vrel ϭ Ϫ450Ί2i mm/s and write

ϭ ␻CAk ؋
˙

393

΃

D
x

␻ ؋ r ϭ 0 since ␻ ϭ constant
˙
␻ ؋ (␻ ؋ r) ϭ 2k ؋ (2k ؋ 225Ί2i) ϭ Ϫ900Ί2i mm/s2
2␻ ؋ vrel ϭ 2(2k) ؋ (Ϫ450Ί2i) ϭ Ϫ1800Ί2j mm/s2

ᕡ

Helpful Hints

arel ϭ ¨i
x

ᕡ If the slot had been curved with a

radius of curvature ␳, the term arel
would have had a component vrel2/␳
normal to the slot and directed toward the center of curvature in addition to its component along the slot.

Substitution into the relative-acceleration equation yields
1
1
(225␻CA ϩ 3600)i ϩ
(Ϫ225␻CA ϩ 3600)j ϭ Ϫ900Ί2i Ϫ 1800Ί2j ϩ ¨i
x
˙
˙
Ί2
Ί2
Equating separately the i and j terms gives
(225␻CA ϩ 3600)/Ί2 ϭ Ϫ900Ί2 ϩ ¨
x
˙
and

(Ϫ225␻CA ϩ 3600)/Ί2 ϭ Ϫ1800Ί2
˙

Solving for the two unknowns gives
␻CA ϭ 32 rad/s2
˙

and

x
¨ ϭ arel ϭ 8910 mm/s2

2v ë vrel

Ans.

ω

vrel

If desired, the acceleration of A may also be written as
aA ϭ (225/Ί2)(32)(i Ϫ j) ϩ (3600/Ί2)(i ϩ j) ϭ 7640i Ϫ 2550j mm/s2

(aA)n

We make use here of the geometric representation of the relative-acceleration
equation to further clarify the problem. The geometric approach may be used as
an alternative solution. Again, we introduce point P on OD coincident with A.
The equivalent scalar terms are
(aA)t ϭ ͉␻CA ؋ rCA ͉ ϭ r␻CA ϭ r␣CA normal to CA, sense unknown
˙
˙

(aP)n

2v ë vrel

R

(aA)t

aA
arel

(aA)n ϭ ͉␻CA ؋ (␻CA ؋ rCA) ͉ ϭ r␻CA2 from A to C
(aP)n ϭ ͉␻ ؋ (␻ ؋ r) ͉ ϭ OP␻2 from P to O
(aP)t ϭ ͉␻ ؋ r͉ ϭ r␻ ϭ 0 since ␻ ϭ constant
˙
˙
͉2␻ ؋ vrel ͉ ϭ 2␻vrel directed as shown

S

arel ϭ ¨ along OD, sense unknown
x
We start with the known vectors and add them head-to-tail for each side of the
equation beginning at R and ending at S, where the intersection of the known
directions of (aA)t and arel establishes the solution. Closure of the polygon determines the sense of each of the two unknown vectors, and their magnitudes are
ᕢ easily calculated from the ﬁgure geometry.

ᕢ It is always possible to avoid a simultaneous solution by projecting
the vectors onto the perpendicular
to one of the unknowns.

394

Chapter 5

Plane Kinematics of Rigid Bodies

SAMPLE PROBLEM 5/19
Aircraft B has a constant speed of 150 m/s as it passes the bottom of a circular loop of 400-m radius. Aircraft A ﬂying horizontally in the plane of the loop
passes 100 m directly below B at a constant speed of 100 m/s. (a) Determine the
instantaneous velocity and acceleration which A appears to have to the pilot of
B, who is ﬁxed to his rotating aircraft. (b) Compare your results for part (a) with
the case of erroneously treating the pilot of aircraft B as nonrotating.

ρ = 400 m

y
x

Solution (a). We begin by clearly deﬁning the rotating coordinate system x-y-z
which best helps us to answer the questions. With x-y-z attached to aircraft B as
shown, the terms vrel and arel in Eqs. 5/12 and 5/14 will be the desired results.
The terms in Eq. 5/12 are

B
z

vA ϭ 100i m/s
100 m

vB ϭ 150i m/s
vB
150
k ϭ 0.375k rad/s
␻ϭ ␳ kϭ
400

ᕡ

A

r ϭ rA/B ϭ Ϫ100j m
vA ϭ vB ϩ ␻ ؋ r ϩ vrel

Eq. 5/12:

y

100i ϭ 150i ϩ 0.375k ؋ (Ϫ100j) ϩ vrel
Solving for vrel gives

vrel ϭ Ϫ87.5i m/s

Ans.

aB

The terms in Eq. 5/14, in addition to those listed above, are
aA ϭ 0
v2
1502
B
j ϭ 56.2j m/s2
aB ϭ ␳ j ϭ
400
␻ϭ0
˙
Eq. 5/14:

B

(z out)

vB

r

100 m

aA ϭ aB ϩ ␻ ؋ r ϩ ␻ ؋ (␻ ؋ r) ϩ 2␻ ؋ vrel ϩ arel
˙
0 ϭ 56.2j ϩ 0 ؋ (Ϫ100j) ϩ 0.375k ؋ [0.375k ؋ (Ϫ100j)]
ϩ 2[0.375k ؋ (Ϫ87.5i)] ϩ arel

Solving for arel gives

arel ϭ Ϫ4.69k m/s2

Ans.

A

vA

(b) For motion relative to translating frames, we use Eqs. 2/20 and 2/21 of
Helpful Hint

Chapter 2:
vA/B ϭ vA Ϫ vB ϭ 100i Ϫ 150i ϭ Ϫ50i m/s
aA/B ϭ aA Ϫ aB ϭ 0 Ϫ 56.2j ϭ Ϫ56.2j m/s2
Again, we see that vrel vA/B and arel aA/B. The rotation of pilot B makes a difference in what he observes!
vB
The scalar result ␻ ϭ ␳ can be obtained by considering a complete circular
2␲␳
motion of aircraft B, during which it rotates 2␲ radians in a time t ϭ v :
B
vB
2␲
␻ϭ
ϭ
␳
2␲␳/vB
Because the speed of aircraft B is constant, there is no tangential acceleration
and thus the angular acceleration ␣ ϭ ␻ of this aircraft is zero.
˙

x

ᕡ Because we choose the rotating frame
x-y-z to be ﬁxed to aircraft B, the angular velocity of the aircraft and the
term ␻ in Eqs. 5/12 and 5/14 are
identical.

Article 5/7

PROBLEMS

Problems

395

y
6″

Introductory Problems
5/157 The disk rotates with angular speed ␻ ϭ 2 rad/s.
The small ball A is moving along the radial slot
with speed u ϭ 100 mm/s relative to the disk. Determine the absolute velocity of the ball and state
the angle ␤ between this velocity vector and the
positive x-axis.

ω
α

A
y
x

O

125 mm
ω

y

B

Problem 5/159
A
u

x

5/160 The disk rotates about a ﬁxed axis through O
with angular velocity ␻ ϭ 5 rad/sec and angular
acceleration ␣ ϭ 3 rad/sec2 in the directions
shown at a certain instant. The small sphere A
moves in the circular slot, and at the same instant,
˙
¨
␤ ϭ 30Њ, ␤ ϭ 2 rad/sec, and ␤ ϭ Ϫ4 rad/sec2. Determine the absolute velocity and acceleration of A at
this instant.

Problem 5/157

5/158 In addition to the conditions stated in the previous
problem, the ball speed u (relative to the disk) is increasing at the rate of 150 mm/s2 and the angular
rate of the disk is decreasing at the rate of
0.8 rad/s2. Determine the Coriolis acceleration relative to the disk-ﬁxed Bxy coordinate system. Also
determine the absolute acceleration of ball A and
the angle ␥ between this acceleration vector and
the positive x-axis.
5/159 The disk rotates about a ﬁxed axis through O with
angular velocity ␻ ϭ 5 rad/sec and angular acceleration ␣ ϭ 3 rad/sec2 at the instant represented, in
the directions shown. The slider A moves in the
straight slot. Determine the absolute velocity and
acceleration of A for the same instant, when y ϭ 8
in., ˙ ϭ Ϫ24 in./sec, and ¨ ϭ 30 in./sec2.
y
y

y

α
ω
A
β

O
15″

Problem 5/160

x

396

Chapter 5

Plane Kinematics of Rigid Bodies

5/161 The slotted wheel rolls to the right without slipping, with a constant speed v ϭ 2 ft/sec of its center
O. Simultaneously, motion of the sliding block A is
controlled by a mechanism not shown so that
x
x
˙ ϭ 1.5 ft/sec with ¨ ϭ 0. Determine the magnitude
of the acceleration of A for the instant when
x ϭ 6 in. and ␪ ϭ 30Њ.

z
N

Ω

8″

v
R

x

v

O

B

A

θ

θ

A
y
x

Problem 5/161

5/162 The disk rolls without slipping on the horizontal
surface, and at the instant represented, the center
O has the velocity and acceleration shown in the
ﬁgure. For this instant, the particle A has the indicated speed u and time rate of change of speed u,
˙
both relative to the disk. Determine the absolute
velocity and acceleration of particle A.
y

·
u = 7 m /s2

S
Problem 5/163

5/164 A stationary pole A is viewed by an observer P who
is sitting on a small merry-go-round which rotates
about a ﬁxed vertical axis at B with a constant angular velocity ⍀ as shown. Determine the apparent
velocity of A as seen by the observer P. Does this
velocity depend on the location of the observer on
the merry-go-round?

u = 2 m /s
y

A

P
x

O
aO = 5 m/s2

Ω

0.24 m

vO = 3 m/s

0.30 m

Problem 5/162

5/163 An experimental vehicle A travels with constant
speed v relative to the earth along a north–south
track. Determine the Coriolis acceleration aCor as a
function of the latitude ␪. Assume an earth-ﬁxed
rotating frame Bxyz and a spherical earth. If the
vehicle speed is v ϭ 500 km/h, determine the magnitude of the Coriolis acceleration at (a) the equator and (b) the north pole.

A
x

B

d
Problem 5/164

Article 5/7
5/165 The small collar A is sliding on the bent bar with
speed u relative to the bar as shown. Simultaneously, the bar is rotating with angular velocity ␻
about the ﬁxed pivot B. Take the x-y axes to be
ﬁxed to the bar and determine the Coriolis acceleration of the slider for the instant represented. Interpret your result.

r
b
A

d
x

y

397

5/167 For an alternative solution to Prob. 5/166 assign
r-␪ coordinates with origin at B as shown. Then
make use of the polar-coordinate relations for the
acceleration of A relative to B. The r- and ␪- components of the absolute acceleration should coincide with the components along and normal to the
ladder which would be found in Prob. 5/166.

A
u

Problems

θ

20′

ω

B

B

θ = 30°

L

Problem 5/167

Problem 5/165

Representative Problems
5/166 The ﬁre truck is moving forward at a speed of 35
mi/hr and is decelerating at the rate of 10 ft/sec2.
Simultaneously, the ladder is being raised and extended. At the instant considered the angle ␪ is 30Њ
and is increasing at the constant rate of 10 deg/sec.
Also at this instant the extension b of the ladder is
5 ft, with ˙ ϭ 2 ft/sec and ¨ ϭ Ϫ1 ft/sec2. For this
b
b
instant determine the acceleration of the end A of
the ladder (a) with respect to the truck and (b) with
respect to the ground.

b

20

B

5/168 Aircraft B has a constant speed of 540 km/h at the
bottom of a circular loop of 400-m radius. Aircraft
A ﬂying horizontally in the plane of the loop passes
100 m directly under B at a constant speed of
360 km/h. With coordinate axes attached to B as
shown, determine the acceleration which A appears
to have to the pilot of B for this instant.

ρ = 400 m

z

A
B

Ј

x

y

θ

100 m

A

Problem 5/166

Problem 5/168

398

Chapter 5

Plane Kinematics of Rigid Bodies

5/169 Bar OA has a counterclockwise angular velocity
␻0 ϭ 2 rad/s. Rod BC slides freely through the pivoted collar attached to OA. Determine the angular
velocity ␻BC of rod BC and the velocity of collar A
relative to rod BC.
C

5/171 Under the action of its stern and starboard bow
thrusters, the cruise ship has the velocity
vB ϭ 1 m/s of its mass center B and angular velocity
␻ ϭ 1 deg/s about a vertical axis. The velocity of B
is constant, but the angular rate ␻ is decreasing at
0.5 deg/s2. Person A is stationary on the dock. What
velocity and acceleration of A are observed by a
passenger ﬁxed to and rotating with the ship?
Treat the problem as two-dimensional.

A
y

0
25

vB

m
m

ω

60°

45°

x

10°

B

ω0

O

15°

100 m

B

A
Problem 5/169
Problem 5/171

5/170 A smooth bowling alley is oriented north–south as
shown. A ball A is released with speed v along the
lane as shown. Because of the Coriolis effect, it will
deﬂect a distance ␦ as shown. Develop a general expression for ␦. The bowling alley is located at a latitude ␪ in the northern hemisphere. Evaluate your
expression for the conditions L ϭ 60 ft, v ϭ 15 ft/sec,
and ␪ ϭ 40Њ. Should bowlers prefer east–west alleys?
State any assumptions.
δ

N

L

5/172 All conditions of the previous problem remain,
except now person A is running to the right with a
constant speed vA ϭ 1.6 m/s (with his instantaneous location still as indicated in the ﬁgure).
Determine the velocity and acceleration which A
appears to have relative to a passenger ﬁxed to and
rotating with the ship.
5/173 Two boys A and B are sitting on opposite sides of a
horizontal turntable which rotates at a constant
counterclockwise angular velocity ␻ as seen from
above. Boy A throws a ball toward B by giving it a
horizontal velocity u relative to the turntable toward B. Assume that the ball has no horizontal
acceleration once released and write an expression
for the magnitude of the acceleration arel which B
would observe the ball to have in the plane of the
turntable just after it is thrown. Sketch the path of
the ball on the turntable as observed by B.

r

v
A

A

u

B

O

Not to scale
ω

Problem 5/170

Problem 5/173

Article 5/7
5/174 Car B turns onto the circular off-ramp with a speed v.
Car A, traveling with the same speed v, continues
in a straight line. Prove that the velocity which A
appears to have to an observer riding in and turning with car B is zero when car A passes the position shown regardless of the angle ␪.

Problems

399

5/177 Cars A and B are both traveling on the curved intersecting roads with equal constant speeds of 30
mi/hr. For the positions shown, obtain the vector
expressions for the velocity and acceleration which
A appears to have to an observer in B who rotates
with the car. The x-y axes are attached to car B.
x
A

B

v

y

B
45°

180′

180′

R

45°

20′

v
Problem 5/177

θ

A

Problem 5/174

5/175 For the conditions and conclusion of Prob. 5/174,
show that the acceleration which car A appears to
have to an observer in and turning with car B is
equal to v2/R in the direction normal to the true
velocity of A.

5/178 The disk rotates about a ﬁxed axis through point O
with a clockwise angular velocity ␻0 ϭ 20 rad/s and a
counterclockwise angular acceleration ␣0 ϭ 5 rad/s2
at the instant under consideration. The value of r is
200 mm. Pin A is ﬁxed to the disk but slides freely
within the slotted member BC. Determine the velocity and acceleration of A relative to slotted member
BC and the angular velocity and angular acceleration
of BC.

5/176 For the instant represented, link CB is rotating
counterclockwise at a constant rate N ϭ 4 rad/s, and
its pin A causes a clockwise rotation of the slotted
member ODE. Determine the angular velocity ␻ and
angular acceleration ␣ of ODE for this instant.

C
A
r
60°

B
120
mm

ω0

C
N

3r
E

120
mm

Problem 5/178
O
A

45°

D

B
Problem 5/176

O

400

Chapter 5

Plane Kinematics of Rigid Bodies

5/179 All conditions of the previous problem remain the
same, except now, rather than rotating about a
ﬁxed center, the disk rolls without slipping on the
horizontal surface. If the disk has a clockwise angular velocity of 20 rad/s and a counterclockwise
angular acceleration of 5 rad/s2, determine the velocity and acceleration of pin A relative to the slotted member BC and the angular velocity and
angular acceleration of BC. The value of r is 200
mm. Neglect the distance from the center of pin A
to the edge of the disk.
C

5/181 The ﬁgure shows the vanes of a centrifugal-pump
impeller which turns with a constant clockwise
speed of 200 rev/min. The ﬂuid particles are observed to have an absolute velocity whose component in the r-direction is 10 ft/sec at discharge
from the vane. Furthermore, the magnitude of the
velocity of the particles measured relative to the
vane is increasing at the rate of 80 ft/sec2 just before they leave the vane. Determine the magnitude
of the total acceleration of a ﬂuid particle an instant before it leaves the impeller. The radius of
curvature ␳ of the vane at its end is 8 in.

A
r

6″

ρ

=

60°

B

O

8″

45°

+r

ω0

3r

ω

Problem 5/179

Problem 5/181

5/180 Two satellites are in circular equatorial orbits of
different altitudes. Satellite A is in a geosynchronous orbit (one with the same period as the earth’s
rotation so that it “hovers” over the same spot on
the equator). Satellite B has an orbit of radius
rB ϭ 30 000 km. Calculate the velocity which A appears to have to an observer ﬁxed in B when the
elevation angle ␪ is (a) 0 and (b) 90Њ. The x-y axes
are attached to B, whose antenna always points
toward the center of the earth (Ϫy-direction).
Consult Art. 3/13 and Appendix D for the necessary orbital information.

x
A

y

5/182 The crank OA revolves clockwise with a constant
angular velocity of 10 rad/s within a limited arc of
its motion. For the position ␪ ϭ 30Њ determine the
angular velocity of the slotted link CB and the acceleration of A as measured relative to the slot in CB.
B

A

2θ

O

θ

m
200 m

θ
B

rA
Problem 5/182

rB

N

Problem 5/180

C

Article 5/7
5/183 The Geneva wheel of Prob. 5/56 is shown again
here. Determine the angular acceleration ␣2 of
wheel C for the instant when ␪ ϭ 20Њ. Wheel A has
a constant clockwise angular velocity of 2 rad/s.

200/ 2
mm

200/ 2
mm

y

θ

O1

O2

ω2

A

C

B

240 km
B

A

401

᭤ 5/184 The space shuttle A is in an equatorial circular orbit
of 240-km altitude and is moving from west to east.
Determine the velocity and acceleration which it appears to have to an observer B ﬁxed to and rotating
with the earth at the equator as the shuttle passes
overhead. Use R ϭ 6378 km for the radius of the
earth. Also use Fig. 1/1 for the appropriate value of g
and carry out your calculations to 4-ﬁgure accuracy.

P

ω1

Problems

200 mm
Problem 5/183
Problem 5/184

x

402

Chapter 5

Plane Kinematics of Rigid Bodies

5/8

Chapter Review

In Chapter 5 we have applied our knowledge of basic kinematics
from Chapter 2 to the plane motion of rigid bodies. We approached the
problem in two ways.

1. Absolute-Motion Analysis
First, we wrote an equation which describes the general geometric
conﬁguration of a given problem in terms of knowns and unknowns.
Then we differentiated this equation with respect to time to obtain velocities and accelerations, both linear and angular.
2. Relative-Motion Analysis
We applied the principles of relative motion to rigid bodies and
found that this approach enables us to solve many problems which are
too awkward to handle by mathematical differentiation. The relativevelocity equation, the instantaneous center of zero velocity, and the
relative-acceleration equation all require that we visualize clearly and
analyze correctly the case of circular motion of one point around another point, as viewed from nonrotating axes.
Solution of the Velocity and Acceleration Equations
The relative-velocity and relative-acceleration relationships are vector equations which we may solve in any one of three ways:
1. by a scalar-geometric analysis of the vector polygon,
2. by vector algebra, or
3. by a graphical construction of the vector polygon.
Rotating Coordinate Systems
Finally, in Chapter 5 we introduced rotating coordinate systems
which enable us to solve problems where the motion is observed relative
to a rotating frame of reference. Whenever a point moves along a path
which itself is turning, analysis by rotating axes is indicated if a relativemotion approach is used. In deriving Eq. 5/12 for velocity and Eq. 5/14
for acceleration, where the relative terms are measured from a rotating
reference system, it was necessary for us to account for the time derivatives of the unit vectors i and j ﬁxed to the rotating frame. Equations
5/12 and 5/14 also apply to spatial motion, as will be shown in Chapter 7.
An important result of the analysis of rotating coordinate systems is
the identiﬁcation of the Coriolis acceleration. This acceleration represents the fact that the absolute velocity vector may have changes in both
direction and magnitude due to rotation of the relative-velocity vector
and change in position of the particle along the rotating path.
In Chapter 6 we will study the kinetics of rigid bodies in plane motion. There we will ﬁnd that the ability to analyze the linear and angular
accelerations of rigid bodies is necessary in order to apply the force and
moment equations which relate the applied forces to the associated motions. Thus, the material of Chapter 5 is essential to that in Chapter 6.

Article 5/8

REVIEW PROBLEMS
5/185 The frictional resistance to the rotation of a ﬂywheel consists of a retardation due to air friction
which varies as the square of the angular velocity
and a constant frictional retardation in the bearing. As a result the angular acceleration of the ﬂywheel while it is allowed to coast is given by
␣ ϭ ϪK Ϫ k␻2, where K and k are constants. Determine an expression for the time required for the
ﬂywheel to come to rest from an initial angular
velocity ␻0.

Review Problems

5/188 The ﬂywheel is rotating with an angular velocity ␻0
at time t ϭ 0 when a torque is applied to increase
its angular velocity. If the torque is controlled so
that the angle ␪ between the total acceleration of
point A on the rim and the radial line to A remains
constant, determine the angular velocity ␻ and the
angular acceleration ␣ as functions of the time t.
A

ω
r

α

5/186 The wheel slips as it rolls. If vO ϭ 4 ft/sec and if the
velocity of A with respect to B is 3Ί2 ft/sec, locate
the instantaneous center C of zero velocity and ﬁnd
the velocity of point P.
B

403

ω

Problem 5/188
6″
P
A

O

vO

3″
D
Problem 5/186

5/189 The equilateral triangular plate is guided by the
two vertex rollers A and B, which are conﬁned to
move in the perpendicular slots. The control rod
gives A a constant velocity vA to the left for an interval of its motion. Determine the value of ␪ for
which the horizontal component of the velocity of C
is zero.

5/187 The bar of Prob. 5/67 is repeated here. If the
velocity and tangential acceleration of end A are as
indicated in the ﬁgure, determine the angular acceleration of the bar.

(aA)t = 0.6 m/s2
vA = 0.3 m/s
0.8 m
O
45°

C

b

b

B
b

θ

vA
A

A
Problem 5/189

B

Problem 5/187

404

Chapter 5

Plane Kinematics of Rigid Bodies

5/190 Roller B of the linkage has a velocity of 0.75 m/s to
the right as the angle ␪ passes 60Њ and bar AB also
makes an angle of 60Њ with the horizontal. Locate
the instantaneous center of zero velocity for bar AB
and determine its angular velocity ␻AB.
A

5/192 The helicopter is ﬂying in the horizontal x-direction
with a velocity v ϭ 120 mi/hr, and the plane of rotation of the 26-ft-diameter rotor is tilted 10Њ from the
horizontal x-y plane. The rotor blades rotate with
an angular velocity ⍀ ϭ 800 rev/min. For the instant represented write the vector expressions for
the absolute velocities of rotor tip A and rotor tip B.
z

360 mm
10°

540 mm

z′
Ω
y, y′

0.75 m/s

B

θ

C
v

O
Problem 5/190

A

5/191 The pin A in the bell crank AOD is guided by the
ﬂanges of the collar B, which slides with a constant
velocity vB of 3 ft/sec along the ﬁxed shaft for an
interval of motion. For the position ␪ ϭ 30Њ determine the acceleration of the plunger CE, whose
upper end is positioned by the radial slot in the bell
crank.
B

vB

D

A

A
4″
θ

6″
O

θ

x′

5/193 The wheel rolls without slipping, and its position is
controlled by the motion of the slider B. If B has a
constant velocity of 10 in./sec to the left, determine
the angular velocity of AB and the velocity of the
center O of the wheel when ␪ ϭ 0.

6″

90°

x

Problem 5/192

C
6″

10°

B

O

16″
B

E
9″
Problem 5/193
Problem 5/191

5/194 If the center O of the wheel of Prob. 5/193 has a
constant velocity of 6 in./sec to the left, calculate the
acceleration of the slider B for the position ␪ ϭ 0.

Article 5/8
5/195 In the linkage shown OC has a constant clockwise
angular velocity ␻ ϭ 2 rad/s during an interval of
motion, while the hydraulic cylinder gives pin A a
constant velocity of 1.2 m/s to the right. For the position shown where OC is vertical and BC is horizontal, calculate the angular velocity of BC. Solve
by drawing the necessary velocity polygon.
B

400 mm

Review Problems

405

᭤ 5/197 The hydraulic cylinder C imparts a velocity v to pin
B in the direction shown. The collar slips freely on
rod OA. Determine the resulting angular velocity of
rod OA in terms of v, the displacement s of pin B,
and the ﬁxed distance d, for the angle ␤ ϭ 15Њ.
β

A

B

C
v

500 mm

s

300 mm
ω

A

O

θ

O

C

vA
d

Problem 5/195

5/196 To speed up the unrolling of a telephone cable the
trailer with the reel of cable starts from rest and is
given an initial acceleration of 3 ft/sec2. Simultaneously, the tow truck pulls the free end of the cable
horizontally in the opposite direction with an initial acceleration of 2 ft/sec2. If both vehicles start
from rest at the same instant, determine the magnitude of the total acceleration of point A on the
forward end of the horizontal reel diameter (a) just
as the motion starts and (b) one second after the
start of the motion.

Problem 5/197

5/198 The ﬁgure illustrates a commonly used quickreturn mechanism which produces a slow cutting
stroke of the tool (attached to D) and a rapid return
stroke. If the driving crank OA is turning at the
˙
constant rate ␪ ϭ 3 rad/s, determine the magnitude
of the velocity of point B for the instant when
␪ ϭ 30Њ.

D

2 ft/sec2

B

A

A
3 ft /sec2

100 mm
O

θ

500 mm
300 mm
Problem 5/196
C

Problem 5/198

406

Chapter 5

Plane Kinematics of Rigid Bodies

5/199 The hydraulic cylinder moves pin A to the right
with a constant velocity v. Use the fact that the distance from A to B is invariant, where B is the point
on AC momentarily in contact with the gear, and
write expressions for the angular velocity ␻ of the
gear and the angular velocity of the rack AC.

5/201 The tilting device maintains a sloshing water bath
for washing vegetable produce. If the crank OA oscillates about the vertical and has a clockwise angular velocity of 4␲ rad/s when OA is vertical, determine
the angular velocity of the basket in the position
shown where ␪ ϭ 30Њ.

A
v

θ

240 mm
m

0m

36

D

B
A

B
θ

ω

80 mm

D

r

C

100 mm

O

Problem 5/201

Problem 5/199

5/200 For the position shown where ␪ ϭ 30Њ, point A on
the sliding collar has a constant velocity v ϭ 0.3 m/s
with corresponding lengthening of the hydraulic
cylinder AC. For this same position BD is horizontal and DE is vertical. Determine the angular acceleration ␣DE of DE at this instant.

A

v

5/202 Determine the angular acceleration of the basket
of the vegetable washer of Prob. 5/201 for the position where OA is vertical. In this position OA has
an angular velocity of 4␲ rad/s and no angular
acceleration.
5/203 A radar station B situated at the equator observes
a satellite A in a circular equatorial orbit of 200-km
altitude and moving from west to east. For the instant when the satellite is 30Њ above the horizon,
determine the difference between the velocity of
the satellite relative to the radar station, as measured from a nonrotating frame of reference, and
the velocity as measured relative to the reference
frame of the radar system.
y
A

D

200 mm

θ

200 km

B

B

30°

90 mm
E

C

Problem 5/203
200 mm
Problem 5/200

x

Article 5/8
᭤ 5/204 The crank OB revolves clockwise at the constant
rate ␻0 of 5 rad/s. For the instant when ␪ ϭ 90Њ determine the angular acceleration ␣ of the rod BD,
which slides through the pivoted collar at C.

r 2

r

ω

250 mm
θ

407

B

B

C

Review Problems

θ

O

ω0

A

r

O
Problem 5/206

D
600 mm
Problem 5/204

*Computer-Oriented Problems
*5/205 The disk rotates about a ﬁxed axis with a constant
angular velocity ␻0 ϭ 10 rad/s. Pin A is ﬁxed to the
disk. Determine and plot the magnitudes of the velocity and acceleration of pin A relative to the slotted member BC as functions of the disk angle ␪
over the range 0 Յ ␪ Յ 360Њ. State the maximum
and minimum values and also the values of ␪ at
which they occur. The value of r is 200 mm.

*5/207 The crank OA of the four-bar linkage is driven at
a constant counterclockwise angular velocity
␻0 ϭ 10 rad/s. Determine and plot as functions of
the crank angle ␪ the angular velocities of bars AB
and BC over the range 0 Յ ␪ Յ 360Њ. State the
maximum absolute value of each angular velocity
and the value of ␪ at which it occurs.
B

240
mm
A

200
mm

ω0

θ

O
A

O

B

C

70 mm
C

θ
ω0

OA = 80 mm

r
190 mm
3r
Problem 5/205

*5/206 Link OA is given a constant counterclockwise
angular velocity ␻. Determine the angular velocity
␻AB of link AB as a function of ␪. Compute and
plot the ratio ␻AB/␻ for the range 0 Յ ␪ Յ 90Њ.
Indicate the value of ␪ for which the angular
velocity of AB is half that of OA.

Problem 5/207

*5/208 If all conditions in the previous problem remain
the same, determine and plot as functions of the
crank angle ␪ the angular accelerations of bars AB
and BC over the range 0 Յ ␪ Յ 360Њ. State the
maximum absolute value of each angular acceleration and the value of ␪ at which it occurs.

408

Chapter 5

Plane Kinematics of Rigid Bodies

*5/209 All conditions of Prob. 5/207 remain the same,
except the counterclockwise angular velocity of
crank OA is 10 rad/s when ␪ ϭ 0 and the constant
counterclockwise angular acceleration of the
crank is 20 rad/s2. Determine and plot as functions of the crank angle ␪ the angular velocities of
bars AB and BC over the range 0 Յ ␪ Յ 360Њ.
State the maximum absolute value of each angular velocity and the value of ␪ at which it occurs.

*5/212 For the slider-crank conﬁguration shown, derive
the expression for the velocity vA of the piston
(taken positive to the right) as a function of ␪. Substitute the numerical data of Sample Problem 5/15
and calculate vA as a function of ␪ for 0 Յ ␪ Յ 180Њ.
Plot vA versus ␪ and ﬁnd its maximum magnitude
and the corresponding value of ␪. (By symmetry
anticipate the results for 180Њ Յ ␪ Յ 360Њ).
y
B

*5/210 For the Geneva wheel of Prob. 5/56, shown again
here, write the expression for the angular velocity
␻2 of the slotted wheel C during engagement of
pin P and plot ␻2 for the range Ϫ45Њ Յ ␪ Յ 45Њ.
The driving wheel A has a constant angular velocity ␻1 ϭ 2 rad/s.

θ

x
vA

200/ 2
mm

r

l

A

ω
O

200/ 2
mm
Problem 5/212
P
θ

ω1

O1

*5/213 For the slider-crank of Prob. 5/212, derive the
expression for the acceleration aA of the piston
(taken positive to the right) as a function of ␪ for
˙
␻ ϭ ␪ ϭ constant. Substitute the numerical data
of Sample Problem 5/15 and calculate aA as a
function of ␪ for 0 Յ ␪ Յ 180Њ. Plot aA versus ␪
and ﬁnd the value of ␪ for which aA ϭ 0. (By symmetry anticipate the results for 180Њ Յ ␪ Յ 360Њ).

ω2

O2

C

B
A
200 mm
Problem 5/210

*5/211 The double crank is pivoted at O and permits
complete rotation without interference with the
pivoted rod CB as it slides through the collar A. If
˙
the crank has a constant angular velocity ␪, de˙˙
termine and plot the ratio ␤ / ␪ as a function of ␪
between ␪ ϭ 0 and ␪ ϭ 180Њ. By inspection deter˙
mine the angle ␤ for which ␤ ϭ 0.
B

B

A
A

r
C

θ

β

O

2r
Problem 5/211

O

O

By changing between a fully outstretched and a tucked or pike position, a diver can cause large changes in her
angular speed about an axis perpendicular to the plane of the trajectory. Conservation of angular momentum is
the key issue here. The rigid-body principles of this chapter apply here, even though the human body is of course
not rigid.
© Belinda Images/SUPERSTOCK

Plane Kinetics
of Rigid Bodies

6

CHAPTER OUTLINE
6/1 Introduction
Section A Force, Mass, and Acceleration
6/2 General Equations of Motion
6/3 Translation
6/4 Fixed-Axis Rotation
6/5 General Plane Motion
Section B Work and Energy
6/6 Work-Energy Relations
6/7 Acceleration from Work-Energy; Virtual Work
Section C Impulse and Momentum
6/8 Impulse-Momentum Equations
6/9 Chapter Review

6/1

Introduction

The kinetics of rigid bodies treats the relationships between the external forces acting on a body and the corresponding translational and
rotational motions of the body. In Chapter 5 we developed the kinematic
relationships for the plane motion of rigid bodies, and we will use these
relationships extensively in this present chapter, where the effects of
forces on the two-dimensional motion of rigid bodies are examined.
For our purpose in this chapter, a body which can be approximated
as a thin slab with its motion conﬁned to the plane of the slab will be
considered to be in plane motion. The plane of motion will contain the
mass center, and all forces which act on the body will be projected onto
the plane of motion. A body which has appreciable dimensions normal to
the plane of motion but is symmetrical about that plane of motion
through the mass center may be treated as having plane motion. These
idealizations clearly ﬁt a very large category of rigid-body motions.
411

412

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

Background for the Study of Kinetics
In Chapter 3 we found that two force equations of motion were required to deﬁne the motion of a particle whose motion is conﬁned to a
plane. For the plane motion of a rigid body, an additional equation is
needed to specify the state of rotation of the body. Thus, two force equations and one moment equation or their equivalent are required to determine the state of rigid-body plane motion.
The kinetic relationships which form the basis for most of the
analysis of rigid-body motion were developed in Chapter 4 for a general
system of particles. Frequent reference will be made to these equations
as they are further developed in Chapter 6 and applied speciﬁcally to the
plane motion of rigid bodies. You should refer to Chapter 4 frequently as
you study Chapter 6. Also, before proceeding make sure that you have a
ﬁrm grasp of the calculation of velocities and accelerations as developed
in Chapter 5 for rigid-body plane motion. Unless you can determine accelerations correctly from the principles of kinematics, you frequently
will be unable to apply the force and moment principles of kinetics. Consequently, you should master the necessary kinematics, including the
calculation of relative accelerations, before proceeding.
Successful application of kinetics requires that you isolate the body
or system to be analyzed. The isolation technique was illustrated and
used in Chapter 3 for particle kinetics and will be employed consistently in the present chapter. For problems involving the instantaneous relationships among force, mass, and acceleration, the body or
system should be explicitly deﬁned by isolating it with its free-body diagram. When the principles of work and energy are employed, an activeforce diagram which shows only those external forces which do work on
the system may be used in lieu of the free-body diagram. The impulsemomentum diagram should be constructed when impulse-momentum
methods are used. No solution of a problem should be attempted without ﬁrst deﬁning the complete external boundary of the body or system
and identifying all external forces which act on it.
In the kinetics of rigid bodies which have angular motion, we must
introduce a property of the body which accounts for the radial distribution of its mass with respect to a particular axis of rotation normal to
the plane of motion. This property is known as the mass moment of inertia of the body, and it is essential that we be able to calculate this property in order to solve rotational problems. We assume that you are
familiar with the calculation of mass moments of inertia. Appendix B
treats this topic for those who need instruction or review.
Organization of the Chapter
Chapter 6 is organized in the same three sections in which we
treated the kinetics of particles in Chapter 3. Section A relates the
forces and moments to the instantaneous linear and angular accelerations. Section B treats the solution of problems by the method of work
and energy. Section C covers the methods of impulse and momentum.
Virtually all of the basic concepts and approaches covered in these
three sections were treated in Chapter 3 on particle kinetics. This repetition will help you with the topics of Chapter 6, provided you understand

Article 6/2

the kinematics of rigid-body plane motion. In each of the three sections,
we will treat three types of motion: translation, ﬁxed-axis rotation, and
general plane motion.

SECTION A FORCE, MASS, AND ACCELERATION
6/2

General Equations of Motion

In Arts. 4/2 and 4/4 we derived the force and moment vector equations of motion for a general system of mass. We now apply these results
by starting, ﬁrst, with a general rigid body in three dimensions. The
force equation, Eq. 4/1,
ΣF ϭ ma

[4/1]

tells us that the resultant ΣF of the external forces acting on the body
equals the mass m of the body times the acceleration a of its mass center G. The moment equation taken about the mass center, Eq. 4/9,

˙
ΣMG ϭ HG

[4/9]

shows that the resultant moment about the mass center of the external
forces on the body equals the time rate of change of the angular momentum of the body about the mass center.
Recall from our study of statics that a general system of forces acting on a rigid body may be replaced by a resultant force applied at a chosen point and a corresponding couple. By replacing the external forces
by their equivalent force-couple system in which the resultant force acts
through the mass center, we may visualize the action of the forces and
the corresponding dynamic response of the body with the aid of Fig. 6/1.

·
HG

ΣMG

–
ma

F1
F4

G

≡

G

≡

G

F2
ΣF
F3
Free-Body Diagram

Equivalent ForceCouple System

Kinetic Diagram

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 6/1

General Equations of Motion

413

414

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

Part a of the ﬁgure shows the relevant free-body diagram. Part b of the
ﬁgure shows the equivalent force-couple system with the resultant force
applied through G. Part c of the ﬁgure is a kinetic diagram, which represents the resulting dynamic effects as speciﬁed by Eqs. 4/1 and 4/9. The
equivalence between the free-body diagram and the kinetic diagram enables us to clearly visualize and easily remember the separate translational and rotational effects of the forces applied to a rigid body. We will
express this equivalence mathematically as we apply these results to the
treatment of rigid-body plane motion.

y
F1

α
ω

mi

ρi

F2

β

x

G

F3
F4

Figure 6/2

–
a

Plane-Motion Equations
We now apply the foregoing relationships to the case of plane motion. Figure 6/2 represents a rigid body moving with plane motion in
the x-y plane. The mass center G has an acceleration a, and the body
has an angular velocity ␻ ϭ ␻k and an angular acceleration ␣ ϭ ␣k,
both taken positive in the z-direction. Because the z-direction of both
␻ and ␣ remains perpendicular to the plane of motion, we may use
scalar notation ␻ and ␣ ϭ ␻ to represent the angular velocity and an˙
gular acceleration.
The angular momentum about the mass center for the general system was expressed in Eq. 4/8a as HG ϭ Σ␳i ؋ mi ␳ i where ␳i is the posi˙
tion vector relative to G of the representative particle of mass mi. For
our rigid body, the velocity of mi relative to G is ␳ i ϭ ␻ ؋ ␳i, which has a
˙
magnitude ␳i␻ and lies in the plane of motion normal to ␳i. The product
␳i ؋ ␳ i is then a vector normal to the x-y plane in the sense of ␻, and its
˙
magnitude is ␳i2␻. Thus, the magnitude of HG becomes HG ϭ Σ␳i2mi␻ ϭ
␻Σ␳i2mi. The summation, which may also be written as ͐ ␳2 dm, is deﬁned as the mass moment of inertia I of the body about the z-axis
through G. (See Appendix B for a discussion of the calculation of mass
moments of inertia.)
We may now write
HG ϭ I␻
where I is a constant property of the body. This property is a measure of
the rotational inertia, which is the resistance to change in rotational velocity due to the radial distribution of mass around the z-axis through
G. With this substitution, our moment equation, Eq. 4/9, becomes

˙
ΣMG ϭ HG ϭ I␻ ϭ I␣
˙
where ␣ ϭ ␻ is the angular acceleration of the body.
˙
We may now express the moment equation and the vector form of
the generalized Newton’s second law of motion, Eq. 4/1, as
ΣF ϭ ma
ΣMG ϭ I␣

(6/1)

Equations 6/1 are the general equations of motion for a rigid body in
plane motion. In applying Eqs. 6/1, we express the vector force equation

Article 6/2

General Equations of Motion

415

in terms of its two scalar components using x-y, n-t, or r-␪ coordinates,
whichever is most convenient for the problem at hand.

Alternative Derivation
It is instructive to use an alternative approach to derive the moment equation by referring directly to the forces which act on the representative particle of mass mi, as shown in Fig. 6/3. The acceleration of
mi equals the vector sum of a and the relative terms ␳i␻2 and ␳i␣, where
the mass center G is used as the reference point. It follows that the resultant of all forces on mi has the components mi a, mi␳i␻2, and mi␳i␣ in
the directions shown. The sum of the moments of these force components about G in the sense of ␣ becomes
MGi ϭ mi␳i2␣ ϩ (mi a sin ␤)xi Ϫ (mi a cos ␤)yi

y
xi

ω

mi

or

ω α

miρiω 2
G

Similar moment expressions exist for all particles in the body, and
the sum of these moments about G for the resultant forces acting on all
particles may be written as
ΣMG ϭ Σmi ␳i2␣ ϩ a sin ␤ Σmi xi Ϫ a cos ␤ Σmi yi
But the origin of coordinates is taken at the mass center, so that Σmi xi
ϭ mx ϭ 0 and Σmi yi ϭ my ϭ 0. Thus, the moment sum becomes
ΣMG ϭ Σmi ␳i2␣ ϭ I␣
as before. The contribution to ΣMG of the forces internal to the body is,
of course, zero since they occur in pairs of equal and opposite forces of
action and reaction between interacting particles. Thus, ΣMG, as before,
represents the sum of moments about the mass center G of only the external forces acting on the body, as disclosed by the free-body diagram.
We note that the force component mi ␳i␻2 has no moment about G
and conclude, therefore, that the angular velocity ␻ has no inﬂuence on
the moment equation about the mass center.
The results embodied in our basic equations of motion for a rigid body
in plane motion, Eqs. 6/1, are represented diagrammatically in Fig. 6/4,

α
–
a

F1

–
Iα

≡

G

G

F2

F3
Free-Body Diagram

Kinetic Diagram

Figure 6/4

–
ma

mi –
a

miρiα

Figure 6/3

β
yi
x

416

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

which is the two-dimensional counterpart of parts a and c of Fig. 6/1 for a
general three-dimensional body. The free-body diagram discloses the forces
and moments appearing on the left-hand side of our equations of motion.
The kinetic diagram discloses the resulting dynamic response in terms of
the translational term ma and the rotational term I␣ which appear on the
right-hand side of Eqs. 6/1.
As previously mentioned, the translational term ma will be expressed by its x-y, n-t, or r-␪ components once the appropriate inertial
reference system is designated. The equivalence depicted in Fig. 6/4 is
basic to our understanding of the kinetics of plane motion and will be
employed frequently in the solution of problems.
Representation of the resultants ma and I␣ will help ensure that
the force and moment sums determined from the free-body diagram are
equated to their proper resultants.

Alternative Moment Equations
In Art. 4/4 of Chapter 4 on systems of particles, we developed a general equation for moments about an arbitrary point P, Eq. 4/11, which is

˙
ΣMP ϭ HG ϩ ␳ ؋ ma

[4/11]

where ␳ is the vector from P to the mass center G and a is the mass-center acceleration. As we have shown earlier in this article, for a rigid body
˙
in plane motion HG becomes I␣. Also, the cross product ␳ ؋ ma is simply the moment of magnitude mad of ma about P. Therefore, for the
two-dimensional body illustrated in Fig. 6/5 with its free-body diagram
and kinetic diagram, we may rewrite Eq. 4/11 simply as
ΣMP ϭ I␣ ϩ mad

(6/2)

Clearly, all three terms are positive in the counterclockwise sense for the
example shown, and the choice of P eliminates reference to F1 and F3.
If we had wished to eliminate reference to F2 and F3, for example,
by choosing their intersection as the reference point, then P would lie
on the opposite side of the ma vector, and the clockwise moment of ma

α
F1

P

d

–
a

– P
ρ

≡

G

–
ma

G
–
Iα

F2

F3
Free-Body Diagram

Kinetic Diagram

Figure 6/5

Article 6/2

about P would be a negative term in the equation. Equation 6/2 is easily
remembered as it is merely an expression of the familiar principle of moments, where the sum of the moments about P equals the combined moment about P of their sum, expressed by the resultant couple ΣMG ϭ I␣
and the resultant force ΣF ϭ ma.
In Art. 4/4 we also developed an alternative moment equation about
P, Eq. 4/13, which is

˙
ΣMP ϭ (HP)rel ϩ ␳ ؋ maP

[4/13]

For rigid-body plane motion, if P is chosen as a point ﬁxed to the body,
˙
then in scalar form (HP)rel becomes IP ␣, where IP is the mass moment of
inertia about an axis through P and ␣ is the angular acceleration of the
body. So we may write the equation as
ΣMP ϭ IP ␣ ϩ ␳ ؋ maP

(6/3)

where the acceleration of P is aP and the position vector from P to G is ␳.
When ␳ ϭ 0, point P becomes the mass center G, and Eq. 6/3 reduces to the scalar form ΣMG ϭ I␣, previously derived. When point P
becomes a point O ﬁxed in an inertial reference system and attached to
the body (or body extended), then aP ϭ 0, and Eq. 6/3 in scalar form reduces to
ΣMO ϭ IO␣

(6/4)

Equation 6/4 then applies to the rotation of a rigid body about a nonaccelerating point O ﬁxed to the body and is the two-dimensional simpliﬁcation of Eq. 4/7.

Unconstrained and Constrained Motion
The motion of a rigid body may be unconstrained or constrained.
The rocket moving in a vertical plane, Fig. 6/6a, is an example of unconstrained motion as there are no physical conﬁnements to its motion.
α
–
ay
A
G

F

–
ay

–
ax

y
mg

α

T

G y

–
ax

x
B
x

(a) Unconstrained Motion

(b) Constrained Motion

Figure 6/6

General Equations of Motion

417

418

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

The two components ax and ay of the mass-center acceleration and the
angular acceleration ␣ may be determined independently of one another
by direct application of Eqs. 6/1.
The bar in Fig. 6/6b, on the other hand, undergoes a constrained
motion, where the vertical and horizontal guides for the ends of the
bar impose a kinematic relationship between the acceleration components of the mass center and the angular acceleration of the bar.
Thus, it is necessary to determine this kinematic relationship from
the principles established in Chapter 5 and to combine it with the
force and moment equations of motion before a solution can be carried out.
In general, dynamics problems which involve physical constraints to
motion require a kinematic analysis relating linear to angular acceleration before the force and moment equations of motion can be solved. It
is for this reason that an understanding of the principles and methods of
Chapter 5 is so vital to the work of Chapter 6.

Systems of Interconnected Bodies
Upon occasion, in problems dealing with two or more connected
rigid bodies whose motions are related kinematically, it is convenient to
analyze the bodies as an entire system.
Figure 6/7 illustrates two rigid bodies hinged at A and subjected to
the external forces shown. The forces in the connection at A are internal
to the system and are not disclosed. The resultant of all external forces
must equal the vector sum of the two resultants m1a1 and m2a2, and the
sum of the moments about some arbitrary point such as P of all external
forces must equal the moment of the resultants, I1␣1 ϩ I2␣2 ϩ m1a1d1 ϩ
m2a2d2. Thus, we may state
ΣF ϭ Σma

(6/5)

ΣMP ϭ ΣI␣ ϩ Σmad

α1

α2
–
m1a1

A
G1

G2

≡
–
a2

–
a1

–
I 2α 2

A

G2

G1
–
I 1α 1

–
m2a 2
d1

d2

P
Free-Body Diagram
of System

≡
Figure 6/7

Kinetic Diagram
of System

Article 6/2

where the summations on the right-hand side of the equations represent as many terms as there are separate bodies.
If there are more than three remaining unknowns in a system, however, the three independent scalar equations of motion, when applied to
the system, are not sufﬁcient to solve the problem. In this case, more advanced methods such as virtual work (Art. 6/7) or Lagrange’s equations
(not discussed in this book*) could be employed, or else the system could
be dismembered and each part analyzed separately with the resulting
equations solved simultaneously.

KEY CONCEPTS
Analysis Procedure
In the solution of force-mass-acceleration problems for the plane
motion of rigid bodies, the following steps should be taken once you understand the conditions and requirements of the problem:

1. Kinematics. First, identify the class of motion and then solve
for any needed linear and angular accelerations which can be determined solely from given kinematic information. In the case of constrained plane motion, it is usually necessary to establish the relation
between the linear acceleration of the mass center and the angular acceleration of the body by ﬁrst solving the appropriate relative-velocity
and relative-acceleration equations. Again, we emphasize that success in
working force-mass-acceleration problems in this chapter is contingent
on the ability to describe the necessary kinematics, so that frequent review of Chapter 5 is recommended.
2. Diagrams. Always draw the complete free-body diagram of the
body to be analyzed. Assign a convenient inertial coordinate system and
label all known and unknown quantities. The kinetic diagram should
also be constructed so as to clarify the equivalence between the applied
forces and the resulting dynamic response.
3. Equations of Motion. Apply the three equations of motion
from Eqs. 6/1, being consistent with the algebraic signs in relation to
the choice of reference axes. Equation 6/2 or 6/3 may be employed as
an alternative to the second of Eqs. 6/1. Combine these relations with
the results from any needed kinematic analysis. Count the number of
unknowns and be certain that there are an equal number of independent equations available. For a solvable rigid-body problem in plane
motion, there can be no more than the five scalar unknowns which can
be determined from the three scalar equations of motion, obtained
from Eqs. 6/1, and the two scalar component relations which come
from the relative-acceleration equation.

*When an interconnected system has more than one degree of freedom, that is, requires
more than one coordinate to specify completely the conﬁguration of the system, the more
advanced equations of Lagrange are generally used. See the ﬁrst author’s Dynamics, 2nd
Edition, SI Version, 1975, John Wiley & Sons, for a treatment of Lagrange’s equations.

General Equations of Motion

419

420

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

In the following three articles the foregoing developments will be
applied to three cases of motion in a plane: translation, ﬁxed-axis rotation, and general plane motion.

6/3

Translation

Rigid-body translation in plane motion was described in Art. 5/1 and
illustrated in Figs. 5/1a and 5/1b, where we saw that every line in a translating body remains parallel to its original position at all times. In rectilinear translation all points move in straight lines, whereas in curvilinear
translation all points move on congruent curved paths. In either case,
there is no angular motion of the translating body, so that both ␻ and ␣
are zero. Therefore, from the moment relation of Eqs. 6/1, we see that all
reference to the moment of inertia is eliminated for a translating body.

x
Path of G

–
ma
y

F1

≡

G
F2

d

G

P

A

F3
Free-Body Diagram

Kinetic Diagram

(a) Rectilinear Translation
(α = 0, ω = 0)
F1

B
F2

≡

G

–
ma t

dB

t
A
dA

Path of G

G

–
ma n

F3
n

n
Free-Body Diagram

Kinetic Diagram

(b) Curvilinear Translation
(α = 0, ω = 0)

Figure 6/8

t

Article 6/3

For a translating body, then, our general equations for plane motion, Eqs. 6/1, may be written
ΣF ϭ ma
ΣMG ϭ I␣ ϭ 0

(6/6)

© Howard Sayer/Alamy

For rectilinear translation, illustrated in Fig. 6/8a, if the x-axis is chosen
in the direction of the acceleration, then the two scalar force equations
become ΣFx ϭ max and ΣFy ϭ may ϭ 0. For curvilinear translation, Fig.
6/8b, if we use n-t coordinates, the two scalar force equations become
ΣFn ϭ man and ΣFt ϭ mat. In both cases, ΣMG ϭ 0.
We may also employ the alternative moment equation, Eq. 6/2,
with the aid of the kinetic diagram. For rectilinear translation we see
that ΣMP ϭ mad and ΣMA ϭ 0. For curvilinear translation the kinetic
diagram permits us to write ΣMA ϭ mandA in the clockwise sense and
ΣMB ϭ mat dB in the counterclockwise sense. Thus, we have complete
freedom to choose a convenient moment center.

The methods of this article apply to this motorcycle if its roll (lean) angle
is constant for an interval of time.

Translation

421

422

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

SAMPLE PROBLEM 6/1
The pickup truck weighs 3220 lb and reaches a speed of 30 mi/hr from rest
in a distance of 200 ft up the 10-percent incline with constant acceleration. Calculate the normal force under each pair of wheels and the friction force under
the rear driving wheels. The effective coefﬁcient of friction between the tires and
the road is known to be at least 0.8.

Solution.

We will assume that the mass of the wheels is negligible compared
ᕡ with the total mass of the truck. The truck may now be simulated by a single
rigid body in rectilinear translation with an acceleration of

ᕢ [v2 ϭ 2as]

aϭ

(44)2
ϭ 4.84 ft/sec2
2(200)

The free-body diagram of the complete truck shows the normal forces N1
and N2, the friction force F in the direction to oppose the slipping of the driving wheels, and the weight W represented by its two components. With ␪ ϭ
tanϪ1 1/10 ϭ 5.71Њ, these components are W cos ␪ ϭ 3220 cos 5.71Њ ϭ 3200 lb
and W sin ␪ ϭ 3220 sin 5.71Њ ϭ 320 lb. The kinetic diagram shows the resultant, which passes through the mass center and is in the direction of its acceleration. Its magnitude is
ma ϭ

3220
(4.84) ϭ 484 lb
32.2

G
24″
1

60″

10

60″

Helpful Hints

ᕡ Without this assumption, we would
be obliged to account for the relatively small additional forces which
produce moments to give the wheels
their angular acceleration.

ᕢ Recall that 30 mi/hr is 44 ft/sec.
y

x

W sin θ
B
1
10

F

A

θ
W cos θ

N2

N1

Applying the three equations of motion, Eqs. 6/1, for the three unknowns
gives

ᕣ [ΣFx ϭ max]
[ΣFy ϭ may ϭ 0]
[ΣMG ϭ I␣ ϭ 0]

F Ϫ 320 ϭ 484

F ϭ 804 lb

N1 ϩ N2 Ϫ 3200 ϭ 0
60N1 ϩ 804(24) Ϫ N2(60) ϭ 0

Ans.

(b)

N2 ϭ 1763 lb

Ans.

Alternative Solution. From the kinetic diagram we see that N1 and N2 can
be obtained independently of one another by writing separate moment equations
about A and B.

ᕤ

120N2 Ϫ 60(3200) Ϫ 24(320) ϭ 484(24)
N2 ϭ 1763 lb

[ΣMB ϭ mad]

B

A

ᕣ We must be careful not to use the

In order to support a friction force of 804 lb, a coefﬁcient of friction of at
least F/N2 ϭ 804/1763 ϭ 0.46 is required. Since our coefﬁcient of friction is at
least 0.8, the surfaces are rough enough to support the calculated value of F so
that our result is correct.

[ΣMA ϭ mad]

ma

(a)

Solving (a) and (b) simultaneously gives
N1 ϭ 1441 lb

≡

Ans.

3200(60) Ϫ 320(24) Ϫ 120N1 ϭ 484(24)
N1 ϭ 1441 lb

Ans.

friction equation F ϭ ␮N here since
we do not have a case of slipping or
impending slipping. If the given coefﬁcient of friction were less than
0.46, the friction force would be
␮N2, and the car would be unable
to attain the acceleration of 4.84
ft/sec2. In this case, the unknowns
would be N1, N2, and a.

ᕤ The left-hand side of the equation is
evaluated from the free-body diagram, and the right-hand side from
the kinetic diagram. The positive
sense for the moment sum is arbitrary but must be the same for both
sides of the equation. In this problem, we have taken the clockwise
sense as positive for the moment of
the resultant force about B.

Article 6/3

Translation

423

SAMPLE PROBLEM 6/2
The vertical bar AB has a mass of 150 kg with center of mass G midway between the ends. The bar is elevated from rest at ␪ ϭ 0 by means of the parallel
links of negligible mass, with a constant couple M ϭ 5 kN ⅐ m applied to the lower
link at C. Determine the angular acceleration ␣ of the links as a function of ␪
and ﬁnd the force B in the link DB at the instant when ␪ϭ 30Њ.

1.5

[ΣFt ϭ mat]

3.33 Ϫ 0.15(9.81) cos ␪ ϭ 0.15(1.5a)
␣ ϭ 14.81 Ϫ 6.54 cos ␪ rad/s2

Ans.

͵

␻

0

␻ d␻ ϭ

͵

␪

0

G

1.5
θ

C

m

1.8 m

A

M

Helpful Hints

ᕡ Generally speaking, the best choice
of reference axes is to make them coincide with the directions in which
the components of the mass-center
acceleration are expressed. Examine
the consequences of choosing horizontal and vertical axes.

ᕢ The force and moment equations for
a body of negligible mass become the
same as the equations of equilibrium. Link BD, therefore, acts as a
two-force member in equilibrium.

With ␣ a known function of ␪, the angular velocity ␻ of the links is obtained from
[␻ d␻ ϭ ␣ d␪]

m

D

Solution.

The motion of the bar is seen to be curvilinear translation since the
bar itself does not rotate during the motion. With the circular motion of the
mass center G, we choose n- and t-coordinates as the most convenient descripᕡ tion. With negligible mass of the links, the tangential component At of the force
at A is obtained from the free-body diagram of AC, where ΣMC ഡ 0 and At ϭ
ᕢ M/AC ϭ 5/1.5 ϭ 3.33 kN. The force at B is along the link. All applied forces are
shown on the free-body diagram of the bar, and the kinetic diagram is also indicated, where the ma resultant is shown in terms of its two components.
The sequence of solution is established by noting that An and B depend on
the n-summation of forces and, hence, on mr␻2 at ␪ ϭ 30Њ. The value of ␻ depends
¨
on the variation of ␣ ϭ ␪ with ␪. This dependency is established from a force
summation in the t-direction for a general value of ␪, where at ϭ (at)A ϭ AC␣.
Thus, we begin with

0.6 m

B

(14.81 Ϫ 6.54 cos ␪) d␪

␻2 ϭ 29.6␪ Ϫ 13.08 sin ␪

t

t

Substitution of ␪ ϭ 30Њ gives
(␻2)30Њ ϭ 8.97 (rad/s)2

B

␣30Њ ϭ 9.15 rad/s2

G

and

θ

–
mrα

≡

G

–
mrω 2

n

n

0.15(9.81) kN

mr␻2 ϭ 0.15(1.5)(8.97) ϭ 2.02 kN
An

mr␣ ϭ 0.15(1.5)(9.15) ϭ 2.06 kN

At
At

The force B may be obtained by a moment summation about A, which eliminates An and At and the weight. Or a moment summation may be taken about
the intersection of An and the line of action of mr␣, which eliminates An and
mr␣. Using A as a moment center gives

An

M

[ΣMA ϭ mad]

1.8 cos 30Њ B ϭ 2.02(1.2) cos 30Њ ϩ 2.06(0.6)
B ϭ 2.14 kN

Ans.

– =1
r

Cn
Ct

The component An could be obtained from a force summation in the n-direction
or from a moment summation about G or about the intersection of B and the
line of action of mr␣.

m
.5

424

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

PROBLEMS
Introductory Problems
6/1 For what acceleration a of the frame will the uniform
slender rod maintain the orientation shown in the ﬁgure? Neglect the friction and mass of the small rollers
at A and B.

6/4 The uniform slender bar of mass m is freely pivoted at
point O of the frame of mass M. Determine the force
P required to maintain the bar perpendicular to the
incline of angle ␪ as the system accelerates in translation down the incline. The coefﬁcient of kinetic friction between the frame and the incline is ␮k.
M
O

A
a

P

m
30°

B

μk
Problem 6/1

θ

6/2 The right-angle bar with equal legs weighs 6 lb and is
freely hinged to the vertical plate at C. The bar is prevented from rotating by the two pegs A and B ﬁxed to
the plate. Determine the acceleration a of the plate
for which no force is exerted on the bar by either peg
A or B.
8″

Problem 6/4

6/5 What acceleration a of the collar along the horizontal
guide will result in a steady-state 15Њ deﬂection of
the pendulum from the vertical? The slender rod of
length l and the particle each have mass m. Friction
at the pivot P is negligible.
a

C

P

a

8″

m
A

B
l

Problem 6/2

15°

6/3 In Prob. 6/2, if the plate is given a horizontal acceleration a ϭ 2g, calculate the force exerted on the bar by
either peg A or B.

m

Problem 6/5

Article 6/3
6/6 The uniform box of mass m slides down the rough incline. Determine the location d of the effective normal
force N. The effective normal force is located at the
centroid of the nonuniform pressure distribution
which the incline exerts on the bottom surface of the
block.

Problems

425

6/9 Determine the acceleration of the initially stationary
20-kg body when the 50-N force P is applied as shown.
The small wheels at B are ideal, and the feet at A are
small.
0.8 m

P = 50 N

20 kg
v

b
h

G

μ s = 0.40

G

m

0.4 m

μk = 0.30

μk

A
N

θ

B
Problem 6/9

d
Problem 6/6

6/7 The homogeneous create of mass m is mounted on
small wheels as shown. Determine the maximum
force P which can be applied without overturning the
crate about (a) its lower front edge with h ϭ b and
(b) its lower back edge with h ϭ 0.
c

6/10 Repeat the previous problem for the case when the
wheels and feet have been reversed as shown in
the ﬁgure for this problem. Compare your answer to
the stated result for the previous problem.
0.8 m

P = 50 N

20 kg
G

0.4 m

μ s = 0.40
μk = 0.30

P
A

b

B

h

Problem 6/10

B

A

Problem 6/7

6/8 Determine the value of P which will cause the homogeneous cylinder to begin to roll up out of its rectangular recess. The mass of the cylinder is m and that of
the cart is M. The cart wheels have negligible mass
and friction.

6/11 The uniform 30-kg bar OB is secured to the accelerating frame in the 30Њ position from the horizontal
by the hinge at O and roller at A. If the horizontal
acceleration of the frame is a ϭ 20 m/s2, compute the
force FA on the roller and the x- and y-components
of the force supported by the pin at O.

B

3000
mm

x
1000
mm

30°

O

m

A

G
r/2
r/2

P

Problem 6/11
M

Problem 6/8

y
a

426

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

6/12 The rear-wheel-drive lawn mower, when placed into
gear while at rest, is observed to momentarily spin its
rear tires as it accelerates. If the coefﬁcients of friction
between the rear tires and the ground are ␮s ϭ 0.70
and ␮k ϭ 0.50, determine the forward acceleration a
of the mower. The mass of the mower and attached
bag is 50 kg with center of mass at G. Assume that the
operator does not push on the handle, so that P ϭ 0.
P

v

G
24″
A

B
66″

44″

Problem 6/14

A

6/15 Repeat the questions of the previous problem for the
3200-lb front-engine car shown, and compare your
answers with those listed for the previous problem.

900
mm
G
B

1000
mm

200
mm

v

215 mm
C

500
mm

G
24″
A

Problem 6/12

44″

6/13 The 6-kg frame AC and 4-kg uniform slender bar AB
of length l slide with negligible friction along the
ﬁxed horizontal rod under the action of the 80-N
force. Calculate the tension T in wire BC and the
x- and y-components of the force exerted on the bar
by the pin at A. The x-y plane is vertical.
80 N
A

C
60°

60°

l

B

y

66″

Problem 6/15

Representative Problems
6/16 The uniform 4-m boom has a mass of 60 kg and is
pivoted to the back of a truck at A and secured by a
cable at C. Calculate the magnitude of the total force
supported by the connection at A if the truck starts
from rest with an acceleration of 5 m/s2.
B

x

B

4m

Problem 6/13

6/14 The mass center of the rear-engine 3200-lb car is at
G. Determine the normal forces NA and NB exerted
by the road on the front and rear pairs of tires for
the conditions of (a) being stationary and (b) braking
from a forward velocity v with all wheels locked. The
coefﬁcient of kinetic friction is 0.90 at all tire/road
interfaces. Express all answers in terms of pounds
and as percentages of the vehicle weight.

60°

C

A

a

2m
Problem 6/16

Article 6/3
6/17 The loaded trailer has a mass of 900 kg with center
of mass at G and is attached at A to a rear-bumper
hitch. If the car and trailer reach a velocity of
60 km /h on a level road in a distance of 30 m from
rest with constant acceleration, compute the vertical
component of the force supported by the hitch at A.
Neglect the small friction force exerted on the relatively light wheels.

2′

60°
y

Problems

427

2′

2′

60°

1′

A
B

60 lb

C

x

G

Problem 6/19
A

0.9 m

0.5 m

1.2 m
Problem 6/17

6/18 Arm AB of a classifying accelerometer has a weight
of 0.25 lb with mass center at G and is pivoted freely
to the frame F at A. The torsional spring at A is set
to preload the arm with an applied clockwise moment
of 2 lb-in. Determine the downward acceleration a of
the frame at which the contact at B will separate
and break the electrical circuit.
2″

6/20 Determine the magnitude P and direction ␪ of the
force required to impart a rearward acceleration
a ϭ 5 ft/sec2 to the loaded wheelbarrow with no rotation from the position shown. The combined
weight of the wheelbarrow and its load is 500 lb with
center of gravity at G. Compare the normal force at
B under acceleration with that for static equilibrium
in the position shown. Neglect the friction and mass
of the wheel.
P
θ

a
A
G

24′′

20′′

1.5″
B
40′′

A

B

G
F
a
Problem 6/18

6/19 The uniform 60-lb log is supported by the two cables
and used as a battering ram. If the log is released
from rest in the position shown, calculate the initial
tension induced in each cable immediately after release and the corresponding angular acceleration ␣
of the cables.

8′′

Problem 6/20

6/21 Solid homogeneous cylinders 400 mm high and
250 mm in diameter are supported by a ﬂat conveyor
belt which moves horizontally. If the speed of the
belt increases according to v ϭ 1.2 ϩ 0.9t2 m/s,
where t is the time in seconds measured from the
instant the increase begins, calculate the value of t
for which the cylinders begin to tip over. Cleats on
the belt prevent the cylinders from slipping.

Problem 6/21

428

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

6/22 The block A and attached rod have a combined mass
of 60 kg and are conﬁned to move along the 60Њ
guide under the action of the 800-N applied force.
The uniform horizontal rod has a mass of 20 kg and
is welded to the block at B. Friction in the guide is
negligible. Compute the bending moment M exerted
by the weld on the rod at B.

6/24 The riding power mower has a mass of 140 kg with
center of mass at G1. The operator has a mass of
90 kg with center of mass at G2. Calculate the minimum effective coefﬁcient of friction ␮ which will permit the front wheels of the mower to lift off the
ground as the mower starts to move forward.

800 N

A
G2
B

100
mm

G1

750
mm

1.4 m

450
mm
B

A
900
mm

60

300
mm

Problem 6/24
Problem 6/22

6/23 The parallelogram linkage shown moves in the vertical plane with the uniform 8-kg bar EF attached to
the plate at E by a pin which is welded both to the
plate and to the bar. A torque (not shown) is applied
to link AB through its lower pin to drive the links in
a clockwise direction. When ␪ reaches 60Њ, the links
have an angular acceleration and an angular velocity
of 6 rad/s2 and 3 rad/s, respectively. For this instant
calculate the magnitudes of the force F and torque
M supported by the pin at E.
Welded
pin
E
A

6/25 The 25-kg bar BD is attached to the two light links
AB and CD and moves in the vertical plane. The
lower link is subjected to a clockwise torque
M ϭ 200 N ⅐ m applied through its shaft at A. If each
link has an angular velocity ␻ ϭ 5 rad/s as it passes
the horizontal position, calculate the force which the
upper link exerts on the bar at D at this instant.
Also ﬁnd the angular acceleration of the links at this
position.

ω

D

1200 mm
F
C

C

300
mm
G

800
mm

800
mm

θ

B

500
mm

θ

D

M
Horizontal
A

B
Problem 6/23

600
mm
Problem 6/25

Article 6/3

6/26 A jet transport with a landing speed of 200 km/h reduces its speed to 60 km/h with a negative thrust R
from its jet thrust reversers in a distance of 425 m
along the runway with constant deceleration. The
total mass of the aircraft is 140 Mg with mass center
at G. Compute the reaction N under the nose wheel
B toward the end of the braking interval and prior to
the application of mechanical braking. At the lower
speed, aerodynamic forces on the aircraft are small
and may be neglected.

Problems

429

r

G
h

v

θ

b/2

b/2

G
3m

R

B

Problem 6/28

1.8 m

A
2.4 m
15 m
Problem 6/26

6/27 The uniform L-shaped bar pivots freely at point P of
the slider, which moves along the horizontal rod.
Determine the steady-state value of the angle ␪ if
(a) a ϭ 0 and (b) a ϭ g/2. For what value of a would
the steady-state value of ␪ be zero?
a

6/29 The parallelogram linkage is used to transfer crates
from platform A to platform B and is hydraulically
operated. The oil pressure in the cylinder is programmed to provide a smooth transition of motion
from ␪ ϭ 0 to ␪ ϭ ␪0 ϭ ␲/3 rad given by ␪ ϭ
␲
␲t
where t is in seconds. Determine the
1 Ϫ cos
6
2
force at D on the pin (a) just after the start of the
motion with ␪ and t essentially zero and (b) when
t ϭ 1 s. The crate and platform have a combined
mass of 200 kg with mass center at G. The mass of
each link is small and may be neglected.

΂

΃

P
G

l

A

480 mm
θ

D

2l

F

θ

B

12
0
mm 0

θ0
C

Problem 6/27

6/28 The van seen from the rear is traveling at a speed v
around a turn of mean radius r banked inward at an
angle ␪. The effective coefﬁcient of friction between
the tires and the road is ␮. Determine (a) the proper
bank angle for a given v to eliminate any tendency to
slip or tip, and (b) the maximum speed v before the
van tips or slips for a given ␪. Note that the forces
and the acceleration lie in the plane of the ﬁgure so
that the problem may be treated as one of plane motion even though the velocity is normal to this plane.

600
mm
Problem 6/29

E

430

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

6/30 The 1800-kg rear-wheel-drive car accelerates forward
at a rate of g/2. If the modulus of each of the rear
and front springs is 35 kN/m, estimate the resulting
momentary nose-up pitch angle ␪. (This upward
pitch angle during acceleration is called squat, while
the downward pitch during braking is called dive!)
Neglect the unsprung mass of the wheels and tires.
(Hint: Begin by assuming a rigid vehicle.)

θ

θ

v
B

G
0.4 m

A

0.4 m

O

0.6 m

1.0 m

0.8 m

0.6 m

a
Problem 6/31
G
600 mm
A

B
1500
mm

1500
mm

Problem 6/30

0.5
m

1.75
m

0.75
m

A

B

5

5

1.

1.

m

m

6/31 The two wheels of the vehicle are connected by a
20-kg link AB with center of mass at G. The link is
pinned to the wheel at B, and the pin at A ﬁts into a
smooth horizontal slot in the link. If the vehicle has a
constant speed of 4 m/s, determine the magnitude of
the force supported by the pin at B for the position
␪ ϭ 30Њ.

᭤ 6/32 The uniform 200-kg bar AB is raised in the vertical
plane by the application of a constant couple
M ϭ 3 kN ⅐ m applied to the link at C. The mass of
the links is small and may be neglected. If the bar
starts from rest at ␪ ϭ 0, determine the magnitude
of the force supported by the pin at A as the position
␪ ϭ 60Њ is passed.

M

θ
C

Problem 6/32

θ

D

Article 6/4

6/4

Fixed-Axis Rotation

431

Fixed-Axis Rotation

Rotation of a rigid body about a ﬁxed axis O was described in Art.
5/2 and illustrated in Fig. 5/1c. For this motion, we saw that all points in
the body describe circles about the rotation axis, and all lines of the
body in the plane of motion have the same angular velocity ␻ and angular acceleration ␣.
The acceleration components of the mass center for circular motion are most easily expressed in n-t coordinates, so we have an ϭ r␻2
and at ϭ r␣, as shown in Fig. 6/9a for rotation of the rigid body about
the fixed axis through O. Part b of the figure represents the free-body
diagram, and the equivalent kinetic diagram in part c of the figure
shows the force resultant ma in terms of its n- and t-components and
the resultant couple I␣.
Our general equations for plane motion, Eqs. 6/1, are directly applicable and are repeated here.
ΣF ϭ ma
ΣMG ϭ I␣

or
– = –α G
at r

ω
t

– = –ω 2
an r

n

O

Fixed-Axis Rotation
(a)

[6/1]

Thus, the two scalar components of the force equation become ΣFn ϭ mr␻2
and ΣFt ϭ mr␣. In applying the moment equation about G, we must account for the moment of the force applied to the body at O, so this force
must not be omitted from the free-body diagram.
For ﬁxed-axis rotation, it is generally useful to apply a moment
equation directly about the rotation axis O. We derived this equation
previously as Eq. 6/4, which is repeated here.
ΣMO ϭ IO␣

α

ω

≡

G

–
Iα

–
ma t
G

–
r
O

–
ma n
O

[6/4]

From the kinetic diagram in Fig. 6/9c, we may obtain Eq. 6/4 very easily
by evaluating the moment of the resultants about O, which becomes
ΣMO ϭ I␣ ϩ matr. Application of the parallel-axis theorem for mass moments of inertia, IO ϭ I ϩ mr 2, gives ΣMO ϭ (IO Ϫ mr 2)␣ ϩ mr 2␣ ϭ IO␣.
For the common case of rotation of a rigid body about a ﬁxed axis
through its mass center G, clearly, a ϭ 0, and therefore ΣF ϭ 0. The resultant of the applied forces then is the couple I␣.
We may combine the resultant-force component mat and resultant
couple I␣ by moving mat to a parallel position through point Q on line
OG, Fig. 6/10, located by mr␣q ϭ I␣ ϩ mr␣(r). Using the parallel-axis
theorem and IO ϭ kO2m gives q ϭ kO2/r.
Point Q is called the center of percussion and has the unique property that the resultant of all forces applied to the body must pass
through it. It follows that the sum of the moments of all forces about the
center of percussion is always zero, ΣMQ ϭ 0.

Kinetic Diagram
(c)

Free-Body Diagram
(b)

Figure 6/9
α
–
mrα

Q
–
mrω 2
G

kO2
q = ——–
–
r

–
r
O

Figure 6/10

432

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

SAMPLE PROBLEM 6/3
24″

The concrete block weighing 644 lb is elevated by the hoisting mechanism
shown, where the cables are securely wrapped around the respective drums. The
drums, which are fastened together and turn as a single unit about their mass center at O, have a combined weight of 322 lb and a radius of gyration about O of 18 in.
If a constant tension P of 400 lb is maintained by the power unit at A, determine
the vertical acceleration of the block and the resultant force on the bearing at O.

W = 322 lb
kO = 18″

12″

P = 400 lb

O
45°

A

644 lb

Solution I. The free-body and kinetic diagrams of the drums and concrete
block are drawn showing all forces which act, including the components Ox and
ᕡ Oy of the bearing reaction. The resultant of the force system on the drums for
centroidal rotation is the couple I␣ ϭ IO␣, where

ᕢ [I ϭ k2m]

I ϭ IO ϭ

΂18΃
12

2

α

400 lb
O

322
ϭ 22.5 lb-ft-sec2
32.2

Ox
Oy

Taking moments about the mass center O for the pulley in the sense of the
angular acceleration ␣ gives

΂ ΃ ΂ ΃

24
12
400
ϪT
ϭ 22.5␣
12
12

[ΣMG ϭ I␣]

322 lb

(a)

T

≡

O

45°

_
Iα

y

x

ma

≡

a

The acceleration of the block is described by
644 lb

[ΣFy ϭ may]

T Ϫ 644 ϭ

644
a
32.2

(b)

From at ϭ r␣, we have a ϭ (12/12)␣. With this substitution, Eqs. (a) and (b) are
combined to give
T ϭ 717 lb

␣ ϭ 3.67 rad/sec2

a ϭ 3.67 ft/sec2

Ox Ϫ 400 cos 45Њ ϭ 0

[ΣFy ϭ 0]

Oy Ϫ 322 Ϫ 717 Ϫ 400 sin 45Њ ϭ 0

ᕡ Be alert to the fact that the tension
T is not 644 lb. If it were, the block
would not accelerate.

Ans.

The bearing reaction is computed from its components. Since a ϭ 0, we use
the equilibrium equations
[ΣFx ϭ 0]

Helpful Hints

ᕢ Do not overlook the need to express
kO in feet when using g in ft/sec2.

Ox ϭ 283 lb
Oy ϭ 1322 lb

O ϭ Ί(283)2 ϩ (1322)2 ϭ 1352 lb

Ans.

Solution II. We may use a more condensed approach by drawing the free-body
diagram of the entire system, thus eliminating reference to T, which becomes internal to the new system. From the kinetic diagram for this system, we see that
the moment sum about O must equal the resultant couple I␣ for the drums, plus
the moment of the resultant ma for the block. Thus, from the principle of Eq. 6/5
we have
[ΣMO ϭ I␣ ϩ mad]

΂ ΃

΂ ΃

α

322 lb
400 lb
O
Oy

΂ ΃

644
24
12
12
a
400
Ϫ 644
ϭ 22.5␣ ϩ
12
12
32.2 12

With a ϭ (12/12)␣, the solution gives, as before, a ϭ 3.67 ft/sec2.
We may equate the force sums on the entire system to the sums of the resultants. Thus,

Ox

O
45°
y

≡

_
Iα

x
a
ma

[ΣFy ϭ Σmay]

Oy Ϫ 322 Ϫ 644 Ϫ 400 sin 45Њ ϭ

322
644
(0) ϩ
(3.67)
32.2
32.2

Oy ϭ 1322 lb
[ΣFx ϭ Σmax]

Ox Ϫ 400 cos 45Њ ϭ 0

Ox ϭ 283 lb

644 lb

Article 6/4

Fixed-Axis Rotation

433

SAMPLE PROBLEM 6/4
The pendulum has a mass of 7.5 kg with center of mass at G and has a radius of gyration about the pivot O of 295 mm. If the pendulum is released from
rest at ␪ ϭ 0, determine the total force supported by the bearing at the instant
when ␪ ϭ 60Њ. Friction in the bearing is negligible.

O
θ
0m
_ = 25
r
m

G

Solution.

The free-body diagram of the pendulum in a general position is
shown along with the corresponding kinetic diagram, where the components of
ᕡ the resultant force have been drawn through G.
The normal component On is found from a force equation in the n-direction,
which involves the normal acceleration r␻2. Since the angular velocity ␻ of the
pendulum is found from the integral of the angular acceleration and since Ot depends on the tangential acceleration r␣, it follows that ␣ should be obtained ﬁrst.
To this end with IO ϭ kO2m, the moment equation about O gives

ᕢ [ΣMO ϭ IO␣]

7.5(9.81)(0.25) cos ␪ ϭ (0.295)2(7.5)␣

Helpful Hints

ᕡ The acceleration components of G
are, of course, an ϭ r␻2 and at ϭ r␣.

On

␣ ϭ 28.2 cos ␪ rad/s2

Ot
O

and for ␪ ϭ 60Њ
[␻ d␻ ϭ ␣ d␪]

͵

␻

0

␻ d␻ ϭ

͵

ω
␲/3

0

28.2 cos ␪ d␪

ϪOt ϩ 7.5(9.81) cos 60Њ ϭ 7.5(0.25)(28.2) cos 60Њ

O ϭ Ί(155.2)2 ϩ (10.37)2 ϭ 155.6 N

O

Ans.

The proper sense for Ot may be observed at the outset by applying the moment
equation ΣMG ϭ I␣, where the moment about G due to Ot must be clockwise to
agree with ␣. The force Ot may also be obtained initially by a moment equation
about the center of percussion Q, shown in the lower ﬁgure, which avoids the necessity of computing ␣. First, we must obtain the distance q, which is

[ΣMQ ϭ 0]

_
mrω 2

7.5(9.81) N

Ot ϭ 10.37 N

[q ϭ kO2/ r ]

G
_
Iα

t

On Ϫ 7.5(9.81) sin 60Њ ϭ 7.5(0.25)(48.8)
On ϭ 155.2 N

[ΣFt ϭ mr␣]

≡

G

The remaining two equations of motion applied to the 60Њ position yield

ᕣ

_
mrα

n

␻2 ϭ 48.8 (rad/s)2

[ΣFn ϭ mr␻2]

α

qϭ

(0.295)2
ϭ 0.348 m
0.250

q

_
mrα
G
Q

_
mrω 2

Ot(0.348) Ϫ 7.5(9.81)(cos 60Њ)(0.348 Ϫ 0.250) ϭ 0
Ot ϭ 10.37 N

Ans.

ᕢ Review the theory again and satisfy

yourself that ΣMO ϭ IO␣ ϭ I␣ ϩ
mr 2␣ ϭ mr␣q.

ᕣ Note especially here that the force
summations are taken in the positive direction of the acceleration
components of the mass center G.

434

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

PROBLEMS

3m
A

Introductory Problems
6/33 The uniform 20-kg slender bar is pivoted at O and
swings freely in the vertical plane. If the bar is released from rest in the horizontal position, calculate
the initial value of the force R exerted by the bearing
on the bar an instant after release.

O

P

3m

θ

1m

1.6 m
Problem 6/33

B

Problem 6/35

6/34 The 20-kg uniform steel plate is freely hinged about
the z-axis as shown. Calculate the force supported by
each of the bearings at A and B an instant after the
plate is released from rest in the horizontal y-z
plane.
x
A

C

6/36 The automotive dynamometer is able to simulate
road conditions for an acceleration of 0.5g for the
loaded pickup truck with a gross weight of 5200 lb.
Calculate the required moment of inertia of the dynamometer drum about its center O assuming that
the drum turns freely during the acceleration phase
of the test.

80 mm

250 mm
80 mm
15′′

B
z

O

A

0
40
mm

y

Problem 6/36
Problem 6/34

6/35 The uniform 100-kg beam is freely hinged about its
upper end A and is initially at rest in the vertical
position with ␪ ϭ 0. Determine the initial angular
acceleration ␣ of the beam and the magnitude FA of
the force supported by the pin at A due to the application of a force P ϭ 300 N on the attached cable.

36′′

Article 6/4
6/37 A momentum wheel for dynamics-class demonstrations is shown. It is basically a bicycle wheel modiﬁed with rim band-weighting, handles, and a pulley
for cord startup. The heavy rim band causes the
radius of gyration of the 7-lb wheel to be 11 in. If a
steady 10-lb pull T is applied to the cord, determine
the angular acceleration of the wheel. Neglect bearing friction.

435

12″

O

18″

T = 10 lb

24″

Problems

M

30°
4″

Problem 6/39

6/40 The uniform slender bar AB has a mass of 8 kg and
swings in a vertical plane about the pivot at A. If
˙
␪ ϭ 2 rad/s when ␪ ϭ 30Њ, compute the force supported by the pin at A at that instant.
Problem 6/37

6/38 Determine the angular acceleration and the force on
the bearing at O for (a) the narrow ring of mass m
and (b) the ﬂat circular disk of mass m immediately
after each is released from rest in the vertical plane
with OC horizontal.

θ

A

Horizontal

90
0m
m

B

r

r
O

O

Problem 6/40
C

C

(a)

(b)
Problem 6/38

6/39 The 30-in. slender bar weighs 20 lb and is mounted
on a vertical shaft at O. If a torque M ϭ 100 lb-in. is
applied to the bar through its shaft, calculate the
horizontal force R on the bearing as the bar starts to
rotate.

6/41 The uniform quarter-circular sector of mass m is released from rest with one straight edge vertical as
shown. Determine the initial angular acceleration
and the horizontal and vertical components of the
reaction at the ideal pivot at O.

O
b

m

Vertical
Problem 6/41

436

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

6/42 The circular sector of uniform thickness and mass m
is released from rest when one of its straight edges is
vertical as shown. Determine the initial angular acceleration about the ideal pivot at O. Evaluate your
general expression for ␤ ϭ ␲/2 and ␤ ϭ ␲. Compare
your results to the stated answer for the previous
problem.

r
O
m
3r

2r

Problem 6/44

O
m

β

6/45 If the slender-bar assembly is released from rest
while in the horizontal position shown, determine its
angular acceleration. The mass per unit length of
the bar is ␳. Neglect friction at the bearing O.

b

b

O

Vertical

b

Problem 6/42

6/43 The square frame is composed of four equal lengths
of uniform slender rod, and the ball attachment at O
is suspended in a socket (not shown). Beginning from
the position shown, the assembly is rotated 45Њ about
axis A-A and released. Determine the initial angular
acceleration of the frame. Repeat for a 45Њ rotation
about axis B-B. Neglect the small mass, offset, and
friction of the ball.
A

B

b/2

b/2
B

O

A

b
b

b

3b

2b

Problem 6/45

6/46 An air table is used to study the elastic motion of
ﬂexible spacecraft models. Pressurized air escaping
from numerous small holes in the horizontal surface
provides a supporting air cushion which largely
eliminates friction. The model shown consists of a
cylindrical hub of radius r and four appendages of
length l and small thickness t. The hub and the four
appendages all have the same depth d and are constructed of the same material of density ␳. Assume
that the spacecraft is rigid and determine the moment M which must be applied to the hub to spin the
model from rest to an angular velocity ␻ in a time
period of ␶ seconds. (Note that for a spacecraft with
highly ﬂexible appendages, the moment must be
judiciously applied to the rigid hub to avoid undesirable large elastic deﬂections of the appendages.)

Problem 6/43

6/44 If the system is released from rest while in the horizontal position shown, determine the angular acceleration of the lightweight right-angle shaft. The
sphere of radius r has mass m. Neglect friction at the
bearing O.

r
l

z
M
t

d

Problem 6/46

Article 6/4
6/47 The narrow ring of mass m is free to rotate in the
vertical plane about O. If the ring is released from
rest at ␪ ϭ 0, determine expressions for the n- and
t-components of the force at O in terms of ␪.

Problems

437

O

6″

4″

n
O

O

θ

12″

r
C
100 lb
Problem 6/49

t
Problem 6/47

Representative Problems
6/48 Determine the angular acceleration of the uniform
disk if (a) the rotational inertia of the disk is ignored
and (b) the inertia of the disk is considered. The
system is released from rest, the cord does not slip on
the disk, and bearing friction at O may be neglected.

5 kg

0.25 m
O

B

6/50 The solid cylindrical rotor B has a mass of 43 kg and
is mounted on its central axis C-C. The frame A rotates about the ﬁxed vertical axis O-O under the applied torque M ϭ 30 N ⅐ m. The rotor may be unlocked
from the frame by withdrawing the locking pin P.
Calculate the angular acceleration ␣ of the frame A
if the locking pin is (a) in place and (b) withdrawn.
Neglect all friction and the mass of the frame.
O
C
P

B

M

200 mm

A

4 kg

A
6 kg
250 mm
Problem 6/48

6/49 The solid homogeneous cylinder weighs 300 lb and is
free to rotate about the horizontal axis O-O. If the
cylinder, initially at rest, is acted upon by the 100-lb
force shown, calculate the horizontal component R
of the force supported by each of the two symmetrically placed bearings when the 100-lb force is ﬁrst
applied.

C
Problem 6/50

O

438

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

6/51 The uniform 40-lb bar is released from rest in the
horizontal position shown and strikes the ﬁxed corner B at the center of percussion of the bar. Determine the t-component of the force exerted by the
bearing O on the bar just prior to impact, during impact, and just after impact.
t

6/53 The bar A of mass m is formed into a 90Њ circular arc
of radius r and is attached to the hub by the light rods.
The curved bar oscillates about the vertical axis under
the action of a torsional spring B. At the instant under
consideration, the angular velocity is ␻ and the angular acceleration is ␣. Write expressions for the moment
M exerted by the spring on the hub and the horizontal
force R exerted by the shaft on the hub.

n
O

6′
O

A

r

30°
A

ω

α

90°
B

r

B

Problem 6/51

6/52 Each of the two grinding wheels has a diameter of
6 in., a thickness of 3 /4 in., and a speciﬁc weight of
425 lb/ft3. When switched on, the machine accelerates from rest to its operating speed of 3450 rev/min
in 5 sec. When switched off, it comes to rest in 35 sec.
Determine the motor torque and frictional moment,
assuming that each is constant. Neglect the effects
of the inertia of the rotating motor armature.

O
Problem 6/53

6/54 The uniform slender bar is released from rest in the
horizontal position shown. Determine the value of x
for which the angular acceleration is a maximum,
and determine the corresponding angular acceleration ␣.
l
x

G

O

ω
Problem 6/54

Problem 6/52

Article 6/4

1.5

m

5m

2.
0.8

439

θ

1.5 m

6/55 The uniform rectangular slab is released from rest in
the position shown. Determine the value of x for which
the angular acceleration is a maximum, and determine
the corresponding angular acceleration. Compare your
answers with those listed for Prob. 6/54.

Problems

m

O

b

O
b
—
2

G
x
O

Problem 6/55

6/56 The spring is uncompressed when the uniform slender bar is in the vertical position shown. Determine
the initial angular acceleration ␣ of the bar when it
is released from rest in a position where the bar
has been rotated 30Њ clockwise from the position
shown. Neglect any sag of the spring, whose mass is
negligible.
A
l
—
4

m

l
—
4

k
G

6/58 A uniform slender bar of mass m and length 2b is
mounted in a right-angle frame of negligible mass.
The bar and frame rotate in the vertical plane about
a ﬁxed axis at O. If the bar is released from rest in
the vertical position (␪ ϭ 0), derive an expression for
the magnitude of the force exerted by the bearing at
O on the frame as a function of ␪.

O
45°

l
—
4
l
—
4

Problem 6/57

45°

θ

b

b

O

G
B
l

b

Problem 6/56

6/57 A gimbal pedestal supports a payload in the space
shuttle and deploys it when the doors of the cargo
bay are opened in orbit. The payload is modeled as a
homogeneous rectangular block with a mass of 6000 kg.
The torque on the gimbal axis O-O is 30 N ⅐ m supplied by a d-c brushless motor. With the shuttle orbiting in a “weightless” condition, determine the
time t required to bring the payload from its stowed
position at ␪ ϭ 0 to its deployed position at ␪ ϭ 90Њ if
the torque is applied for the ﬁrst 45Њ of travel and
then reversed for the remaining 45Њ to bring the pay˙
load to a stop ( ␪ ϭ 0).

Problem 6/58

440

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

6/59 The uniform semicircular bar of mass m and radius r
is hinged freely about a horizontal axis through A. If
the bar is released from rest in the position shown,
where AB is horizontal, determine the initial angular acceleration ␣ of the bar and the expression for
the force exerted on the bar by the pin at A. (Note
carefully that the initial tangential acceleration of
the mass center is not vertical.)

6/61 The 12-kg cylinder supported by the bearing brackets at A and B has a moment of inertia about the
vertical z0 -axis through its mass center G equal to
0.080 kg ⅐ m2. The disk and brackets have a moment
of inertia about the vertical z-axis of rotation equal
to 0.60 kg ⅐ m2. If a torque M ϭ 16 N ⅐ m is applied to
the disk through its shaft with the disk initially at
rest, calculate the horizontal x-components of force
supported by the bearings at A and B.

A

z

B

z0
0 100
100 10 mm
m mm
m

r

A

G

B
Problem 6/59

y

6/60 A device for impact testing consists of a 34-kg pendulum with mass center at G and with radius of gyration
about O of 620 mm. The distance b for the pendulum
is selected so that the force on the bearing at O has the
least possible value during impact with the specimen
at the bottom of the swing. Determine b and calculate
the magnitude of the total force R on the bearing O an
instant after release from rest at ␪ ϭ 60Њ.

M

x

Problem 6/61
O
600 mm
θ

b
G

6/62 The 24-kg uniform slender bar AB is mounted on end
rollers of negligible mass and rotates about the ﬁxed
point O as it follows the circular path in the vertical
plane. The bar is released from a position which gives
it an angular velocity ␻ ϭ 2 rad/s as it passes the
position ␪ ϭ 45Њ. Calculate the forces FA and FB exerted by the guide on the rollers for this instant.
O

Problem 6/60

600

A
30

0

mm

600 mm

Specimen

θ

m

m

G

30

0

m

m

B

Problem 6/62

Article 6/4
6/63 The mass of gear A is 20 kg and its centroidal radius
of gyration is 150 mm. The mass of gear B is 10 kg
and its centroidal radius of gyration is 100 mm. Calculate the angular acceleration of gear B when a
torque of 12 N ⅐ m is applied to the shaft of gear A.
Neglect friction.

rA = 240 mm
rB = 180 mm

M

A

Problems

441

6/65 Disk B weighs 50 lb and has a centroidal radius of
gyration of 8 in. The power unit C consists of a
motor M and a disk A, which is driven at a constant
angular speed of 1600 rev/min. The coefﬁcients of
static and kinetic friction between the two disks are
␮s ϭ 0.80 and ␮k ϭ 0.60, respectively. Disk B is initially stationary when contact with disk A is established by application of the constant force P ϭ 3 lb.
Determine the angular acceleration ␣ of B and the
time t required for B to reach its steady-state speed.

rA
rB

rB
B

30°

B

ωA

rA
A

M
P

rA = 8 in.
rB = 10 in.

C

Problem 6/63
Problem 6/65

6/64 Prior to deployment of its two instrument arms AB,
the spacecraft shown in the upper view is spinning at
the constant rate of 1 revolution per second. Each
instrument arm, shown in the lower view, has a mass
of 10 kg with mass center at G. Calculate the tension
T in the deployment cable prior to release. Also ﬁnd
the magnitude of the force on the pin at A. Neglect
any acceleration of the center O of the spacecraft.
B

A
O

6/66 Two slender bars AB, each of mass m and length l,
are pivoted at A to the plate. The plate rotates in the
horizontal plane about a ﬁxed vertical axis through
its center O and is given a constant angular acceleration ␣. (a) Determine the force F exerted on each of
the two rollers as the assembly starts to rotate.
(b) Find the total force on the pin at A and show that
it remains constant as long as F Ͼ 0. (c) Determine
the angular velocity ␻ at which contact with the
rollers ceases.

ω

l
—
2

l
—
2

A
A

B

B
O

l
—
2

α

ω

O

400
mm

l
—
2

100 mm
A

T
500
mm

G

Problem 6/64

B

B

A
Problem 6/66

442

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

6/67 The robotic device consists of the stationary pedestal
OA, arm AB pivoted at A, and arm BC pivoted at B.
The rotation axes are normal to the plane of the ﬁgure. Estimate (a) the moment MA applied to arm AB
required to rotate it about joint A at 4 rad/s2 counterclockwise from the position shown with joint B
locked and (b) the moment MB applied to arm BC
required to rotate it about joint B at the same rate
with joint A locked. The mass of arm AB is 25 kg and
that of BC is 4 kg, with the stationary portion of joint
A excluded entirely and the mass of joint B divided
equally between the two arms. Assume that the centers of mass G1 and G2 are in the geometric centers
of the arms and model the arms as slender rods.

6/69 The uniform slender bar of mass m and length l is
released from rest in the vertical position and pivots
on its square end about the corner at O. (a) If the
bar is observed to slip when ␪ ϭ 30Њ, ﬁnd the coefﬁcient of static friction ␮s between the bar and the
corner. (b) If the end of the bar is notched so that it
cannot slip, ﬁnd the angle ␪ at which contact between the bar and the corner ceases.

l
7
m 00
m

0
35 m
m

B

θ

G2

G1

90°
C

O

45°
A
Problem 6/69

O

Problem 6/67

6/68 Each of the two uniform slender bars OA and BC
has a mass of 8 kg. The bars are welded at A to form
a T-shaped member and are rotating freely about a
horizontal axis through O. If the bars have an angular velocity ␻ of 4 rad/s as OA passes the horizontal
position shown, calculate the total force R supported
by the bearing at O.
C

᭤ 6/70 The uniform rectangular block is released from rest
with ␪ essentially zero and pivots in the vertical
plane about the center A of its lower face on the
ﬁxed corner. (a) If the block is observed to slip when
␪ ϭ 30Њ, ﬁnd the coefﬁcient of static friction between
the block and the corner. (b) If the bottom face of the
block is notched so that it cannot slip, ﬁnd the angle
␪ at which contact between the block and the corner
ceases.
α

12″

20″
0.25 m

θ

0.5 m
A

A

O

0.25 m
Problem 6/70
B
Problem 6/68

Article 6/5

6/5

General Plane Motion

The dynamics of a rigid body in general plane motion combines
translation and rotation. In Art. 6/2 we represented such a body in Fig.
6/4 with its free-body diagram and its kinetic diagram, which discloses
the dynamic resultants of the applied forces. Figure 6/4 and Eqs. 6/1,
which apply to general plane motion, are repeated here for convenient
reference.
ΣF ϭ ma

[6/1]

ΣMG ϭ I␣

Direct application of these equations expresses the equivalence between
the externally applied forces, as disclosed by the free-body diagram, and
their force and moment resultants, as represented by the kinetic diagram.
α
–
a

F1

≡

G

–
Iα

–
ma

G

F2

F3
Free-Body Diagram

Kinetic Diagram

Figure 6/4, repeated

KEY CONCEPTS
Solving Plane-Motion Problems
Keep in mind the following considerations when solving planemotion problems.

Choice of Coordinate System. The force equation of Eq. 6/1 should
be expressed in whatever coordinate system most readily describes the
acceleration of the mass center. You should consider rectangular,
normal-tangential, and polar coordinates.
Choice of Moment Equation. In Art. 6/2 we also showed, with the
aid of Fig. 6/5, the application of the alternative relation for moments
about any point P, Eq. 6/2. This ﬁgure and this equation are also repeated here for easy reference.
ΣMP ϭ I␣ ϩ mad

[6/2]

In some instances, it may be more convenient to use the alternative moment relation of Eq. 6/3 when moments are taken about a point P whose
acceleration is known. Note also that the equation for moments about a

General Plane Motion

443

444

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

α
F1

P

≡

G

d

–
a

– P
ρ

–
ma

G
–
Iα

F2

F3
Free-Body Diagram

Kinetic Diagram

Figure 6/5, repeated
nonaccelerating point O on the body, Eq. 6/4, constitutes still another
alternative moment relation and at times may be used to advantage.

Constrained versus Unconstrained Motion. In working a problem
in general plane motion, we ﬁrst observe whether the motion is unconstrained or constrained, as illustrated in the examples of Fig. 6/6. If the
motion is constrained, we must account for the kinematic relationship
between the linear and the angular accelerations and incorporate it into
our force and moment equations of motion. If the motion is unconstrained, the accelerations can be determined independently of one another by direct application of the three motion equations, Eqs. 6/1.
Number of Unknowns. In order for a rigid-body problem to be
solvable, the number of unknowns cannot exceed the number of independent equations available to describe them, and a check on the sufﬁciency of the relationships should always be made. At the most, for
plane motion we have three scalar equations of motion and two scalar
components of the vector relative-acceleration equation for constrained
motion. Thus, we can handle as many as ﬁve unknowns for each rigid
body.
Identiﬁcation of the Body or System. We emphasize the importance of clearly choosing the body to be isolated and representing this
isolation by a correct free-body diagram. Only after this vital step has
been completed can we properly evaluate the equivalence between the
external forces and their resultants.
Kinematics. Of equal importance in the analysis of plane motion
is a clear understanding of the kinematics involved. Very often, the difﬁculties experienced at this point have to do with kinematics, and a thorough review of the relative-acceleration relations for plane motion will
be most helpful.
Consistency of Assumptions. In formulating the solution to a
problem, we recognize that the directions of certain forces or accelerations may not be known at the outset, so that it may be necessary to
make initial assumptions whose validity will be proved or disproved
when the solution is carried out. It is essential, however, that all assumptions made be consistent with the principle of action and reaction

Article 6/5

Media Bakery

and with any kinematic requirements, which are also called conditions
of constraint.
Thus, for example, if a wheel is rolling on a horizontal surface, its center is constrained to move on a horizontal line. Furthermore, if the unknown linear acceleration a of the center of the wheel is assumed positive
to the right, then the unknown angular acceleration ␣ will be positive in a
clockwise sense in order that a ϭ ϩr␣, if we assume the wheel does not
slip. Also, we note that, for a wheel which rolls without slipping, the static
friction force between the wheel and its supporting surface is generally less
than its maximum value, so that F ␮sN. But if the wheel slips as it rolls,
a r␣, and a kinetic friction force is generated which is given by F ϭ ␮kN.
It may be necessary to test the validity of either assumption, slipping or no
slipping, in a given problem. The difference between the coefﬁcients of static and kinetic friction, ␮s and ␮k, is sometimes ignored, in which case, ␮ is
used for either or both coefﬁcients.

Look ahead to Prob. 6/103 to see a special-case problem involving a crashtest dummy such as the one shown here.

General Plane Motion

445

446

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

SAMPLE PROBLEM 6/5
A metal hoop with a radius r ϭ 6 in. is released from rest on the 20Њ incline.
If the coefﬁcients of static and kinetic friction are ␮s ϭ 0.15 and ␮k ϭ 0.12, determine the angular acceleration ␣ of the hoop and the time t for the hoop to move a
distance of 10 ft down the incline.

G
6″

μ s = 0.15
μ k = 0.12

Solution. The free-body diagram shows the unspeciﬁed weight mg, the normal
force N, and the friction force F acting on the hoop at the contact point C with the
incline. The kinetic diagram shows the resultant force ma through G in the direction of its acceleration and the couple I␣. The counterclockwise angular acceleration requires a counterclockwise moment about G, so F must be up the incline.
Assume that the hoop rolls without slipping, so that a ϭ r␣. Application of
the components of Eqs. 6/1 with x- and y-axes assigned gives
[ΣFx ϭ max]

mg sin 20Њ Ϫ F ϭ ma

[ΣFy ϭ may ϭ 0]

20°
y
α

x
20°

g
32.2
(0.342) ϭ 5.51 ft/sec2
a ϭ sin 20Њ ϭ
2
2

mgr sin 20Њ ϭ

mr2

a
ϩ mar
r

≡

_
Iα
_ G
ma
C

N

Helpful Hints

ᕡ Because all of the mass of a hoop is a
distance r from its center G, its moment of inertia about G must be mr2.

Alternatively, with our assumption of a ϭ r␣ for pure rolling, a moment
sum about C by Eq. 6/2 gives a directly. Thus,
[ΣMC ϭ I␣ ϩ mad]

6″
r=
C
F

Fr ϭ mr2␣

Elimination of F between the ﬁrst and third equations and substitution of the
kinematic assumption a ϭ r␣ give

ᕢ

G

_
a

N Ϫ mg cos 20Њ ϭ 0

ᕡ [ΣMG ϭ I␣]

mg

ᕢ Note that a is independent of both m
and r.

g
a ϭ sin 20Њ
2

To check our assumption of no slipping, we calculate F and N and compare
F with its limiting value. From the above equations,
F ϭ mg sin 20Њ Ϫ m

g
sin 20Њ ϭ 0.1710mg
2

N ϭ mg cos 20Њ ϭ 0.940mg
But the maximum possible friction force is
[Fmax ϭ ␮sN]

Fmax ϭ 0.15(0.940mg) ϭ 0.1410mg

Because our calculated value of 0.1710mg exceeds the limiting value of 0.1410mg,
we conclude that our assumption of pure rolling was wrong. Therefore, the hoop
slips as it rolls and a r␣. The friction force then becomes the kinetic value
[F ϭ ␮kN]

F ϭ 0.12(0.940mg) ϭ 0.1128mg

The motion equations now give
[ΣFx ϭ max]

mg sin 20Њ Ϫ 0.1128mg ϭ ma
a ϭ 0.229(32.2) ϭ 7.38 ft/sec2

ᕣ [ΣMG ϭ I␣]

0.1128mg(r) ϭ mr2␣
0.1128(32.2)
␣ϭ
ϭ 7.26 rad/sec2
6/12

ᕣ Note that ␣ is independent of m but
Ans.

The time required for the center G of the hoop to move 10 ft from rest with constant acceleration is
1

[x ϭ 2 at2]

Ans.

dependent on r.

Article 6/5

General Plane Motion

SAMPLE PROBLEM 6/6

447

B

The drum A is given a constant angular acceleration ␣0 of 3 rad/s2 and
causes the 70-kg spool B to roll on the horizontal surface by means of the connecting cable, which wraps around the inner hub of the spool. The radius of
gyration k of the spool about its mass center G is 250 mm, and the coefficient
α0
of static friction between the spool and the horizontal surface is 0.25. Determine the tension T in the cable and the friction force F exerted by the horizontal surface on the spool.

450 mm
G
150
mm

250
mm

A
y

Solution.

The free-body diagram and the kinetic diagram of the spool are
drawn as shown. The correct direction of the friction force may be assigned in
this problem by observing from both diagrams that with counterclockwise angular acceleration, a moment sum about point G (and also about point D) must be
counterclockwise. A point on the connecting cable has an acceleration at ϭ r␣ ϭ
0.25(3) ϭ 0.75 m/s2, which is also the horizontal component of the acceleration of
point D on the spool. It will be assumed initially that the spool rolls without
slipping, in which case it has a counterclockwise angular acceleration ␣ ϭ
ᕡ (aD)x/DC ϭ 0.75/0.30 ϭ 2.5 rad/s2. The acceleration of the mass center G is,
therefore, a ϭ r␣ ϭ 0.45(2.5) ϭ 1.125 m/s2.
With the kinematics determined, we now apply the three equations of motion, Eqs. 6/1,

_
k = 250 mm

α

_
Iα

70(9.81) N
_
a

x

G

≡

_
ma
G

D

T

C

C

F
N

Helpful Hints
[ΣFx ϭ max]
[ΣFy ϭ may]

ᕢ [ΣMG ϭ I␣]

F Ϫ T ϭ 70(Ϫ1.125)
N Ϫ 70(9.81) ϭ 0

(a)

N ϭ 687 N

F(0.450) Ϫ T(0.150) ϭ 70(0.250)2(2.5)

(b)

and

T ϭ 154.6 N

Ans.

To establish the validity of our assumption of no slipping, we see that the surfaces are capable of supporting a maximum friction force Fmax ϭ ␮sN ϭ
0.25(687) ϭ 171.7 N. Since only 75.8 N of friction force is required, we conclude
that our assumption of rolling without slipping is valid.
If the coefﬁcient of static friction had been 0.1, for example, then the friction force would have been limited to 0.1(687) ϭ 68.7 N, which is less than 75.8
N, and the spool would slip. In this event, the kinematic relation a ϭ r␣ would
ᕣ no longer hold. With (aD)x known, the angular acceleration would be ␣ ϭ [a Ϫ
(aD)x]/GD. Using this relation along with F ϭ ␮kN ϭ 68.7 N, we would then resolve the three equations of motion for the unknowns T, a, and ␣.
Alternatively, with point C as a moment center in the case of pure rolling,
we may use Eq. 6/2 and obtain T directly. Thus,
[ΣMC ϭ I␣ ϩ mar]

kinematic constraint which accompanies the assumption that the spool
rolls without slipping.

ᕢ Be careful not to make the mistake

Solving (a) and (b) simultaneously gives
F ϭ 75.8 N

ᕡ The relation between a and ␣ is the

of using 1 mr2 for I of the spool,
2
which is not a uniform circular disk.

ᕣ Our principles of relative acceleration are a necessity here. Hence, the
relation (aG/D)t ϭ GD␣ should be
recognized.

0.3T ϭ 70(0.25)2(2.5) ϩ 70(1.125)(0.45)
T ϭ 154.6 N

Ans.

where the previous kinematic results for no slipping have been incorporated. We

ᕤ could also write a moment equation about point D to obtain F directly.

ᕤ The ﬂexibility in the choice of moment centers provided by the kinetic
diagram can usually be employed to
simplify the analysis.

448

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

SAMPLE PROBLEM 6/7

A

The slender bar AB weighs 60 lb and moves in the vertical plane, with its
ends constrained to follow the smooth horizontal and vertical guides. If the 30-lb
force is applied at A with the bar initially at rest in the position for which ␪ ϭ 30Њ,
calculate the resulting angular acceleration of the bar and the forces on the
small end rollers at A and B.

30 lb
2′

θ

y

G

x

2′
B

Solution.

The bar undergoes constrained motion, so that we must establish
the relationship between the mass-center acceleration and the angular acceleraᕡ tion. The relative-acceleration equation aA ϭ aB ϩ aA/B must be solved ﬁrst, and
then the equation a ϭ aG ϭ aB ϩ aG/B is next solved to obtain expressions relating a and ␣. With ␣ assigned in its clockwise physical sense, the acceleration
polygons which represent these equations are shown, and their solution gives

aA/B = 4α

θ = 30°

ay ϭ a sin 30Њ ϭ 2␣ sin 30Њ ϭ 1.0␣ ft/sec2

Helpful Hints

Next we construct the free-body diagram and the kinetic diagram as shown.
With ax and ay now known in terms of ␣, the remaining unknowns are ␣ and the
forces A and B. We now apply Eqs. 6/1, which give

ᕢ [ΣMG ϭ I␣]

[ΣFx ϭ max]

30 Ϫ B ϭ
A Ϫ 60 ϭ

1 60
(42)␣
12 32.2

ᕡ If the application of the relative-acceleration equations is not perfectly
clear at this point, then review Art.
5/6. Note that the relative normal acceleration term is absent since there
is no angular velocity of the bar.

ᕢ Recall that the moment of inertia of a
1
slender rod about its center is 12 ml2.

60
(1.732␣)
32.2

[ΣFy ϭ may]

60
(1.0␣)
32.2

B ϭ 15.74 lb

␣ ϭ 4.42

rad/sec2

Ans.

G

1 60
(42)␣
12 32.2

␣ ϭ 4.42 rad/sec2

≡

_
Iα

G

_
max
dy

C

C

ᕣ From the kinetic diagram, Σmad ϭ
maxdy ϩ maydx. Since both terms of
the sum are clockwise, in the same
sense as I␣, they are positive.

60
60
(1.732␣)(2 cos 30Њ) ϩ
(1.0␣)(2 sin 30Њ)
32.2
32.2
43.9 ϭ 9.94␣

30°

60 lb
B

ᕣ [ΣMC ϭ I␣ ϩ Σmad]

ϩ

_
may

A

As an alternative solution, we can use Eq. 6/2 with point C as the moment
center and avoid the necessity of solving three equations simultaneously. This
choice eliminates reference to forces A and B and gives ␣ directly. Thus,

30(4 cos 30Њ) Ϫ 60(2 sin 30Њ) ϭ

dx

30 lb

Solving the three equations simultaneously gives us the results
A ϭ 68.2 lb

_
a
30°
_
ax

aA

ax ϭ a cos 30Њ ϭ 2␣ cos 30Њ ϭ 1.732␣ ft/sec2

30(2 cos 30Њ) Ϫ A(2 sin 30Њ) ϩ B(2 cos 30Њ) ϭ

(aG / B)t = 2α

aB _
ay

aB

Ans.

With ␣ determined, we can now apply the force equations independently
and get
[ΣFy ϭ may]

A Ϫ 60 ϭ

60
(1.0)(4.42)
32.2

A ϭ 68.2 lb

Ans.

[ΣFx ϭ max]

30 Ϫ B ϭ

60
(1.732)(4.42)
32.2

B ϭ 15.74 lb

Ans.

Article 6/5

General Plane Motion

SAMPLE PROBLEM 6/8

449

a

A car door is inadvertently left slightly open when the brakes are applied to
give the car a constant rearward acceleration a. Derive expressions for the angular velocity of the door as it swings past the 90Њ position and the components of
the hinge reactions for any value of ␪. The mass of the door is m, its mass center
is a distance r from the hinge axis O, and the radius of gyration about O is kO.
θ

O

Because the angular velocity ␻ increases with ␪, we need to ﬁnd how
the angular acceleration ␣ varies with ␪ so that we may integrate it over the interval to obtain ␻. We obtain ␣ from a moment equation about O. First, we draw
the free-body diagram of the door in the horizontal plane for a general position ␪.
The only forces in this plane are the components of the hinge reaction shown
here in the x- and y-directions. On the kinetic diagram, in addition to the resultant couple I␣ shown in the sense of ␣, we represent the resultant force ma in
terms of its components by using an equation of relative acceleration with reᕡ spect to O. This equation becomes the kinematic equation of constraint and is

ω

Solution.

Oy

Ox

x

θ
–
r
y

a ϭ aG ϭ aO ϩ (aG/O)n ϩ (aG/O)t

G

O

≡

–
mrω 2 ma =
o
G ma
–
Iα
–
mrα

The magnitudes of the ma components are then

ᕢ

maO ϭ ma

m(aG/O)n ϭ mr␻2

Helpful Hints

m(aG/O)t ϭ mr␣

˙
¨
where ␻ ϭ ␪ and ␣ ϭ ␪ .
For a given angle ␪, the three unknowns are ␣, Ox, and Oy. We can eliminate
Ox and Oy by a moment equation about O, which gives
ᕣ [ΣMO ϭ I␣ ϩ Σmad]

␣ϭ

of positive ␣ with respect to rotation
about O.

ar
sin ␪
kO2

ᕣ The free-body diagram shows that

Now we integrate ␣ ﬁrst to a general position and get

͵

[␻ d␻ ϭ ␣ d␪]

␻

0

␻ d␻ ϭ
␻2 ϭ
␻ϭ

For ␪ ϭ␲/2,

ᕥ

͵

␪

0

there is zero moment about O. We
use the transfer-of-axis theorem
here and substitute kO2 ϭ k2 ϩ r 2. If
this relation is not totally familiar,
review Art. B/1 in Appendix B.

ar
sin ␪ d␪
kO2

2ar
(1 Ϫ cos ␪)
kO2

ᕤ We may also use Eq. 6/3 with O as a

1
Ί2ar
kO

Ans.

΄ 2ar
k
r
ϭ ma΄1 Ϫ
k
O

2

2

2

O

[ΣFy ϭ may]

where the scalar values of the terms
are IO␣ ϭ mkO2␣ and ␳ ϫ maO becomes Ϫrma sin ␪.

Ox ϭ ma Ϫ mr␻2 cos ␪ Ϫ mr␣ sin ␪
ϭm aϪ

2

(1 Ϫ cos ␪) cos ␪ Ϫ

΅

ar 2
sin2 ␪
kO2

΅

(1 ϩ 2 cos ␪ Ϫ 3 cos2␪)

ᕥ The kinetic diagram shows clearly the
terms which make up max and may.
Ans.

Oy ϭ mr␣ cos ␪ Ϫ mr␻2 sin ␪
ϭ mr
ϭ

ar
2ar
sin ␪ cos ␪ Ϫ mr 2 (1 Ϫ cos ␪) sin ␪
kO2
kO

mar 2
(3 cos ␪ Ϫ 2) sin ␪
kO2

moment center
ΣMO ϭ IO␣ ϩ ␳ ؋ maO

To ﬁnd Ox and Oy for any given value of ␪, the force equations give
[ΣFx ϭ max]

only point on the door whose acceleration is known.

ᕢ Be careful to place mr␣ in the sense

0 ϭ m(kO2 Ϫ r2)␣ ϩ mr␣(r) Ϫ ma(r sin ␪)

ᕤ Solving for ␣ gives

ᕡ Point O is chosen because it is the

Ans.

450

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

PROBLEMS
500 mm

Introductory Problems

200 mm

6/71 The uniform square plate of mass m is lying motionless on the horizontal surface when the force P is
applied at A as shown. Determine the resulting initial
acceleration of point B. Friction is negligible.

m/2

y

P=6N

m/2

x

y
Problem 6/73

B
b

6/74 Repeat Prob. 6/73, except now the location of force P
has been changed. The value of the mass m of the
entire body is 1.2 kg.

b

P

x

A

500 mm
200 mm

y

m/2
x

Problem 6/71

P=6N

6/72 The L-shaped bar of mass m is lying motionless on
the horizontal surface when the force P is applied
at A as shown. Determine the initial acceleration
of point A. Neglect friction and the thickness of
the bar.
B
y

l

x

l
P

A

m/2

Problem 6/74

6/75 Above the earth’s atmosphere at an altitude of 400
km where the acceleration due to gravity is 8.69 m/s2,
a certain rocket has a total remaining mass of 300 kg
and is directed 30Њ from the vertical. If the thrust T
from the rocket motor is 4 kN and if the rocket nozzle is tilted through an angle of 1Њ as shown, calculate the angular acceleration ␣ of the rocket and the
x- and y-components of the acceleration of its mass
center G. The rocket has a centroidal radius of gyration of 1.5 m.

Problem 6/72

y
30°

6/73 The body consists of a uniform slender bar and a
uniform disk, each of mass m/2. It rests on a smooth
surface. Determine the angular acceleration ␣ and
the acceleration of the mass center of the body when
the force P ϭ 6 N is applied as shown. The value
of the mass m of the entire body is 1.2 kg.

x
G

3m

1°
Problem 6/75

T

Article 6/5
6/76 The 10-kg wheel with a radius of gyration of 180 mm
about its center O is released from rest on the 60Њ incline and slips as it rolls. If the coefﬁcient of kinetic
friction is ␮k ϭ 0.30, calculate the acceleration aO
of the center O of the wheel and its angular acceleration ␣.

Problems

451

6/80 The uniform disk of mass m2 ϭ 8 kg pivots freely on
the cart of mass m1 ϭ 5 kg. Determine the acceleration
of the assembly and the angular acceleration of the
disk under the action of the force P ϭ 75 N applied to a
cord wrapped securely around the disk.
P = 75 N
0.2 m

200 mm
O

m1

O
m2

μk = 0.30

20°
Problem 6/80

60°
Problem 6/76

6/77 How large would the coefﬁcient of static friction ␮s
have to be in order that the wheel of Prob. 6/76 not
slip as it rolls?
6/78 The solid homogeneous cylinder is released from rest
on the ramp. If ␪ ϭ 40Њ, ␮s ϭ 0.30, and ␮k ϭ 0.20, determine the acceleration of the mass center G and the
friction force exerted by the ramp on the cylinder.

6/81 The fairing which covers the spacecraft package in
the nose of the booster rocket is jettisoned when the
rocket is in space where gravitational attraction is
negligible. A mechanical actuator moves the two
halves slowly from the closed position I to position II
at which point the fairings are released to rotate
freely about their hinges at O under the inﬂuence of
the constant acceleration a of the rocket. When position III is reached, the hinge at O is released and the
fairings drift away from the rocket. Determine the
angular velocity ␻ of the fairing at the 90Њ position.
The mass of each fairing is m with center of mass at
G and radius of gyration kO about O.

W = 8 lb

a

6″
I

II

G

μs
μk

G
r

θ

90°

III
G
Problem 6/78

6/79 Repeat Prob. 6/78, except let ␪ ϭ 30Њ, ␮s ϭ 0.15, and
␮k ϭ 0.10.

O
ω

Problem 6/81

452

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

6/82 Determine the angular acceleration of each of the
two wheels as they roll without slipping down the inclines. For wheel A investigate the case where the
mass of the rim and spokes is negligible and the
mass of the bar is concentrated along its centerline.
For wheel B assume that the thickness of the rim is
negligible compared with its radius so that all of the
mass is concentrated in the rim. Also specify the
minimum coefﬁcient of static friction ␮s required to
prevent each wheel from slipping.

l

A

Problem 6/83
r

θ

6/84 The uniform 12-kg square panel is suspended from
point C by the two wires at A and B. If the wire at B
suddenly breaks, calculate the tension T in the wire
at A an instant after the break occurs.

B

C

r

A

45°

45°

θ

B

b

Problem 6/82

b
Problem 6/84

Representative Problems
6/83 A uniform slender rod of length l and mass m is
secured to a circular hoop of radius l as shown. The
mass of the hoop is negligible. If the rod and hoop
are released from rest on a horizontal surface in the
position illustrated, determine the initial values of
the friction force F and normal force N under the
hoop if friction is sufﬁcient to prevent slipping.

6/85 The uniform steel beam of mass m and length l is
suspended by the two cables at A and B. If the cable
at B suddenly breaks, determine the tension T in the
cable at A immediately after the break occurs. Treat
the beam as a slender rod and show that the result is
independent of the length of the beam.

l

60°
A

60°
B

Problem 6/85

Article 6/5
6/86 The circular disk of mass m and radius r is rolling
through the bottom of the circular path of radius R.
If the disk has an angular velocity ␻, determine the
force N exerted by the path on the disk.

m = 25 kg
k = 175 mm

453

200 mm
T

75
mm

θ

G

μs = 0.10
μk = 0.08

ω

Problems

R
Problem 6/88
r

6/89 Repeat Prob. 6/88, except let T ϭ 50 N and ␪ ϭ 30Њ.
6/90 The uniform rectangular panel of mass m is moving
to the right when wheel B drops off the horizontal
support rail. Determine the resulting angular acceleration and the force TA in the strap at A immediately after wheel B rolls off the rail. Neglect friction
and the mass of the small straps and wheels.

Problem 6/86

6/87 The system is released from rest with the cable taut,
and the homogeneous cylinder does not slip on the
rough incline. Determine the angular acceleration of
the cylinder and the minimum coefﬁcient ␮s of friction for which the cylinder will not slip.

b
–
–
6

2b
–
–
3

b
–
–
6

A

B

h

m
v

7 kg
Problem 6/90
O
0.15 m
20°

10 kg

6/91 The uniform slender bar AB has a mass of 0.8 kg and
is driven by crank OA and constrained by link CB
of negligible mass. If OA has an angular acceleration
␣0 ϭ 4 rad/s2 and an angular velocity ␻0 ϭ 2 rad/s
when both OA and CB are normal to AB, calculate
the force in CB for this instant. (Suggestion: Consider the use of Eq. 6/3 with A as a moment center.)

Problem 6/87

6/88 The circular disk of 200-mm radius has a mass of
25 kg with centroidal radius of gyration k ϭ 175
mm and has a concentric circular groove of 75-mm
radius cut into it. A steady force T is applied at an
angle ␪ to a cord wrapped around the groove as
shown. If T ϭ 30 N, ␪ ϭ 0, ␮s ϭ 0.10, and ␮k ϭ 0.08,
determine the angular acceleration ␣ of the disk, the
acceleration a of its mass center G, and the friction
force F which the surface exerts on the disk.

C

ω0
w
α
w0

O

200
mm

100
mm
A

300 mm
Problem 6/91

B

454

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

6/92 The crank OA rotates in the vertical plane with a
constant clockwise angular velocity ␻0 of 4.5 rad/s.
For the position where OA is horizontal, calculate
the force under the light roller B of the 10-kg slender
bar AB.
O

0.4 m

A

7
m 00
m

B

G2

G1

90°
C

1.0 m

0.8 m

0
35 m
m

ω0

6/94 The robotic device of Prob. 6/67 is repeated here.
Member AB is rotating about joint A with a counterclockwise angular velocity of 2 rad/s, and this rate is
increasing at 4 rad/s2. Determine the moment MB
exerted by arm AB on arm BC if joint B is held in a
locked condition. The mass of arm BC is 4 kg, and
the arm may be treated as a uniform slender rod.

45°
A

B
O
Problem 6/92

Problem 6/94

6/93 Each of the two solid disk wheels weighs 20 lb, and
the inner solid cylinder weighs 16 lb. The disk
wheels and the inner disk are mounted on the small
central shaft O-O and can rotate independently of
each other. Friction in the shaft bearings is negligible, whereas friction between the incline and the
large disk wheels is sufﬁcient to prevent slippage of
the wheels. Determine the acceleration of the center
O after the assembly is released on the 10Њ incline.
The cord wrapped securely around the inner cylinder is fastened to point A.

6/95 The uniform slender rod of mass m and length L is
released from rest in the inverted vertical position
shown. Neglect friction and the mass of the small
end roller and ﬁnd the initial acceleration of A.
Evaluate your result for ␪ ϭ 30Њ.
m

L

12″
6″
O

O

A
A

O
10°

θ

Problem 6/95
Problem 6/93

Article 6/5
6/96 In an investigation of whiplash resulting from rearend collision, sudden rotation of the head is modeled
by using a homogeneous solid sphere of mass m and
radius r pivoted about a tangent axis (at the neck) to
represent the head. If the axis at O is given a constant acceleration a with the head initially at rest,
determine expressions for the initial angular acceleration ␣ of the head and its angular velocity ␻ as a
function of the angle ␪ of rotation. Assume that the
neck is relaxed so that no moment is applied to the
head at O.

Problems

455

6/98 The assembly consisting of a uniform slender bar
(mass m/5) and a rigidly attached uniform disk
(mass 4m/5) is freely pinned to point O on the collar
that in turn slides on the ﬁxed horizontal guide. The
assembly is at rest when the collar is given a sudden
acceleration a to the left as shown. Determine the
initial angular acceleration of the assembly.
a
P
O

Vertical

m
5
G

L/2

G
r
O

L/4

aO = a

O
L/4

4m
5

Problem 6/96

6/97 The uniform 15-kg bar is supported on the horizontal surface at A by a small roller of negligible mass.
If the coefﬁcient of kinetic friction between end B
and the vertical surface is 0.30, calculate the initial
acceleration of end A as the bar is released from rest
in the position shown.
y

B

Problem 6/98

6/99 The uniform 12-ft pole is hinged to the truck bed
and released from the vertical position as the truck
starts from rest with an acceleration of 3 ft/sec2. If
the acceleration remains constant during the motion
of the pole, calculate the angular velocity ␻ of the
pole as it reaches the horizontal position.

μ
wk = 0.30

40°

12′

2.4 m
90°
ω

O

A
x
Problem 6/97
Problem 6/99

a

456

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

6/100 The T-shaped body of mass m is composed of two
identical slender bars welded together. If the body is
released from rest in the vertical plane in the position
shown, determine the initial acceleration of point A.
Neglect the small mass and friction of the roller.

l
––
2

A
l

l
––
2

30°

Problem 6/100

6/101 A bowling ball with a circumference of 27 in. weighs
14 lb and has a radius of gyration of 3.28 in. If the
ball is released with a velocity of 20 ft/sec but with
no angular velocity as it touches the alley ﬂoor,
compute the distance traveled by the ball before it
begins to roll without slipping. The coefﬁcient of
friction between the ball and the ﬂoor is 0.20.

6/103 In a study of head injury against the instrument
panel of a car during sudden or crash stops where
lap belts without shoulder straps or airbags are
used, the segmented human model shown in the
ﬁgure is analyzed. The hip joint O is assumed to
remain ﬁxed relative to the car, and the torso above
the hip is treated as a rigid body of mass m freely
pivoted at O. The center of mass of the torso is at G
with the initial position of OG taken as vertical.
The radius of gyration of the torso about O is kO. If
the car is brought to a sudden stop with a constant
deceleration a, determine the velocity v relative to
the car with which the model’s head strikes the instrument panel. Substitute the values m ϭ 50 kg,
r ϭ 450 mm, r ϭ 800 mm, kO ϭ 550 mm, ␪ ϭ 45Њ,
and a ϭ 10g and compute v.
θ

r
G
r
O

s

Problem 6/103

v0

v

ω=0

v = rω

Problem 6/101

6/102 The compound pendulum of mass m and radius of
gyration kO about O is freely hinged to the trolley,
which is given a constant horizontal acceleration a
from rest with the pendulum initially at rest with
␪ ϭ 0. Determine an expression for the angular ac¨
celeration ␪ and the n- and t-components of the
force at O as functions of ␪. Calculate the maximum value reached by ␪ if a ϭ 0.5g.

6/104 The uniform slender bar of mass m and length L
with small end rollers is released from rest in the
position shown with the lower roller in contact
with the horizontal plane. Determine the normal
force N under the lower roller and the angular
acceleration ␣ of the bar immediately after release.

L
O

a
θ

n
r

t

θ

G

Problem 6/102

Problem 6/104

Article 6/5
6/105 The connecting rod AB of a certain internalcombustion engine weighs 1.2 lb with mass center
at G and has a radius of gyration about G of 1.12 in.
The piston and piston pin A together weigh 1.80 lb.
The engine is running at a constant speed of 3000
rev/min, so that the angular velocity of the crank is
3000(2␲)/60 ϭ 100␲ rad/sec. Neglect the weights of
the components and the force exerted by the gas in
the cylinder compared with the dynamic forces
generated and calculate the magnitude of the force
on the piston pin A for the crank angle ␪ ϭ 90Њ.
(Suggestion: Use the alternative moment relation,
Eq. 6/3, with B as the moment center.)

Problems

457

m
40°

r

M

O

μs

30°

Problem 6/106

᭤ 6/107 The small rollers at the ends of the uniform slender
bar are conﬁned to the circular slot in the vertical
surface. If the bar is released from rest in the position shown, determine the initial angular acceleration ␣. Neglect the mass and friction of the rollers.

A
3′′

A
G
θ

1.3′′
B
l

O
1.7′′

30°

ω

B

Problem 6/105

6/106 A particle of mass m is embedded at the periphery
of the otherwise uniform disk of mass M and radius
r as shown. The disk starts from rest and does not
slip on the rough incline. (a) For the position
shown, what condition on m will cause the disk to
begin to roll up the incline? (b) If m ϭ 4M, determine the initial angular acceleration of the disk
and the minimum value of the coefﬁcient of static
friction required for the no-slip condition.

Problem 6/107

458

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

᭤ 6/108 The small end rollers of the 8-lb uniform slender
bar are constrained to move in the slots, which
lie in a vertical plane. At the instant when ␪ ϭ 30Њ,
the angular velocity of the bar is 2 rad/sec counterclockwise. Determine the angular acceleration of
the bar, the reactions at A and B, and the accelerations of points A and B under the action of the 6-lb
force P. Neglect the friction and mass of the small
rollers.

A

θ

l = 4 ft

105°

B
Problem 6/108

P = 6 lb

Article 6/6

SECTION B
6/6

Work-Energy Relations

459

WORK AND ENERGY

Work-Energy Relations

In our study of the kinetics of particles in Arts. 3/6 and 3/7, we developed the principles of work and energy and applied them to the motion of a particle and to selected cases of connected particles. We found
that these principles were especially useful in describing motion which
resulted from the cumulative effect of forces acting through distances.
Furthermore, when the forces were conservative, we were able to determine velocity changes by analyzing the energy conditions at the beginning and end of the motion interval. For ﬁnite displacements, the
work-energy method eliminates the necessity for determining the acceleration and integrating it over the interval to obtain the velocity
change. These same advantages are realized when we extend the workenergy principles to describe rigid-body motion.
Before carrying out this extension, you should review the definitions and concepts of work, kinetic energy, gravitational and elastic
potential energy, conservative forces, and power treated in Arts. 3/6
and 3/7 because we will apply them to rigid-body problems. You
should also review Arts. 4/3 and 4/4 on the kinetics of systems of particles, in which we extended the principles of Arts. 3/6 and 3/7 to encompass any general system of mass particles, which includes rigid
bodies.

Work of Forces and Couples
The work done by a force F has been treated in detail in Art. 3/6
and is given by
Uϭ

͵ F ⅐ dr

or

Uϭ

͵ (F cos ␣) ds

where dr is the inﬁnitesimal vector displacement of the point of application of F, as shown in Fig. 3/2a. In the equivalent scalar form of the integral, ␣ is the angle between F and the direction of the displacement,
and ds is the magnitude of the vector displacement dr.
We frequently need to evaluate the work done by a couple M which
acts on a rigid body during its motion. Figure 6/11 shows a couple M ϭ Fb
acting on a rigid body which moves in the plane of the couple. During
time dt the body rotates through an angle d␪, and line AB moves to
AЈBЈ. We may consider this motion in two parts, ﬁrst a translation to
AЈBЉ and then a rotation d␪ about AЈ. We see immediately that during
the translation the work done by one of the forces cancels that done
by the other force, so that the net work done is dU ϭ F(b d␪) ϭ M d␪
due to the rotational part of the motion. If the couple acts in the sense
opposite to the rotation, the work done is negative. During a ﬁnite rotation, the work done by a couple M whose plane is parallel to the plane of
motion is, therefore,
Uϭ

͵ M d␪

F

F

B″ b dθ

b

A

dθ

B′

B

dθ
A′
F

≡
M

F

Figure 6/11

460

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

mi

Kinetic Energy
We now use the familiar expression for the kinetic energy of a particle to develop expressions for the kinetic energy of a rigid body for each
of the three classes of rigid-body plane motion illustrated in Fig. 6/12.

vi = v
v
G

(a) Translation. The translating rigid body of Fig. 6/12a has a
mass m and all of its particles have a common velocity v. The kinetic en1
ergy of any particle of mass mi of the body is Ti ϭ 2 miv2, so for the en1
1 2
tire body T ϭ Σ 2 miv2 ϭ 2 v Σmi or

(a) Translation
v i = ri ω

1

T ϭ 2 mv2

mi

This expression holds for both rectilinear and curvilinear translation.

ri

(b) Fixed-axis rotation. The rigid body in Fig. 6/12b rotates
with an angular velocity ␻ about the fixed axis through O. The kinetic
1
energy of a representative particle of mass mi is Ti ϭ 2 mi(ri␻)2. Thus,
1 2
2.
for the entire body T ϭ 2 ␻ Σmiri But the moment of inertia of the body
about O is IO ϭ Σmiri2, so

ω

O

(b) Fixed-Axis
Rotation

yi

θ

–
v

G

(6/8)

Note the similarity in the forms of the kinetic energy expressions for
translation and rotation. You should verify that the dimensions of the
two expressions are identical.

–
v

θ
ρi

T ϭ 1 I O ␻2
2

vi

ρi ω
mi

(6/7)

ω

(c) General Plane
Motion

Figure 6/12

(c) General plane motion. The rigid body in Fig. 6/12c executes plane motion where, at the instant considered, the velocity of
its mass center G is v and its angular velocity is ␻. The velocity vi of a
representative particle of mass mi may be expressed in terms of the
mass-center velocity v and the velocity ␳i␻ relative to the mass center
as shown. With the aid of the law of cosines, we write the kinetic energy of the body as the sum ΣTi of the kinetic energies of all its particles. Thus,
T ϭ Σ 1 mivi2 ϭ Σ 1 mi(v 2 ϩ ␳i2␻2 ϩ 2v␳i␻ cos ␪)
2
2
Because ␻ and v are common to all terms in the third summation, we may
factor them out. Thus, the third term in the expression for T becomes
␻ v Σmi␳i cos ␪ ϭ ␻ v Σmi yi ϭ 0
since Σmi yi ϭ my ϭ 0. The kinetic energy of the body is then T ϭ

1 2
1 2
2
2 v Σmi ϩ 2 ␻ Σmi␳i or

T ϭ 1 mv 2 ϩ 1 I␻2
2
2

(6/9)

where I is the moment of inertia of the body about its mass center. This
expression for kinetic energy clearly shows the separate contributions to
the total kinetic energy resulting from the translational velocity v of the
mass center and the rotational velocity ␻ about the mass center.

Article 6/6

The kinetic energy of plane motion may also be expressed in terms of
the rotational velocity about the instantaneous center C of zero velocity.
Because C momentarily has zero velocity, the proof leading to Eq. 6/8 for
the ﬁxed point O holds equally well for point C, so that, alternatively, we
may write the kinetic energy of a rigid body in plane motion as
1

T ϭ 2 IC ␻2

(6/10)

In Art. 4/3 we derived Eq. 4/4 for the kinetic energy of any system
of mass. We now see that this expression is equivalent to Eq. 6/9
␳
when the mass system is rigid. For a rigid body, the quantity ˙i in Eq.
4/4 is the velocity of the representative particle relative to the mass
center and is the vector ␻ ؋ ␳i, which has the magnitude ␳i␻. The
1
1
1
summation term in Eq. 4/4 becomes Σ 2 mi(␳i␻)2 ϭ 2 ␻2 Σmi␳i2 ϭ 2 I␻ 2,
which brings Eq. 4/4 into agreement with Eq. 6/9.

Potential Energy and the Work-Energy Equation
Gravitational potential energy Vg and elastic potential energy Ve
were covered in detail in Art. 3/7. Recall that the symbol UЈ (rather than
U) is used to denote the work done by all forces except the weight and
elastic forces, which are accounted for in the potential-energy terms.
The work-energy relation, Eq. 3/15a, was introduced in Art. 3/6 for
particle motion and was generalized in Art. 4/3 to include the motion of
a general system of particles. This equation
T1 ϩ U1-2 ϭ T2

[4/2]

applies to any mechanical system. For application to the motion of a single rigid body, the terms T1 and T2 must include the effects of translaton and rotation as given by Eqs. 6/7, 6/8, 6/9, or 6/10, and U1-2 is the
work done by all external forces. On the other hand, if we choose to express the effects of weight and springs by means of potential energy
rather than work, we may rewrite the above equation as
T1 ϩ V1 ϩ UЈ ϭ T2 ϩ V2
1-2

[4/3a]

where the prime denotes the work done by all forces other than weight
and spring forces.
When applied to an interconnected system of rigid bodies, Eq. 4/3a
includes the effect of stored elastic energy in the connections, as well as
that of gravitational potential energy for the various members. The
term UЈ includes the work of all forces external to the system (other
1-2
than gravitational forces), as well as the negative work of internal friction forces, if any. The terms T1 and T2 are the initial and ﬁnal kinetic
energies of all moving parts over the interval of motion in question.
When the work-energy principle is applied to a single rigid body, either a free-body diagram or an active-force diagram should be used. In
the case of an interconnected system of rigid bodies, an active-force diagram of the entire system should be drawn in order to isolate the system
and disclose all forces which do work on the system. Diagrams should

Work-Energy Relations

461

462

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

also be drawn to disclose the initial and ﬁnal positions of the system for
the given interval of motion.
The work-energy equation provides a direct relationship between
the forces which do work and the corresponding changes in the motion
of a mechanical system. However, if there is appreciable internal mechanical friction, then the system must be dismembered in order to disclose the kinetic-friction forces and account for the negative work which
they do. When the system is dismembered, however, one of the primary
advantages of the work-energy approach is automatically lost. The
work-energy method is most useful for analyzing conservative systems
of interconnected bodies, where energy loss due to the negative work of
friction forces is negligible.

Power
The concept of power was discussed in Art. 3/6, which treated workenergy for particle motion. Recall that power is the time rate at which
work is performed. For a force F acting on a rigid body in plane motion,
the power developed by that force at a given instant is given by Eq. 3/16
and is the rate at which the force is doing work. The power is given by
dU F ⅐ dr
ϭ
ϭ F⅐v
dt
dt

Pϭ

where dr and v are, respectively, the differential displacement and the
velocity of the point of application of the force.
Similarly, for a couple M acting on the body, the power developed by
the couple at a given instant is the rate at which it is doing work, and is
given by
Pϭ

dU M d␪
ϭ
ϭ M␻
dt
dt

where d␪ and ␻ are, respectively, the differential angular displacement
and the angular velocity of the body. If the senses of M and ␻ are the
same, the power is positive and energy is supplied to the body. Conversely, if M and ␻ have opposite senses, the power is negative and energy is removed from the body. If the force F and the couple M act
simultaneously, the total instantaneous power is
P ϭ F ⅐ v ϩ M␻
We may also express power by evaluating the rate at which the total mechanical energy of a rigid body or a system of rigid bodies is changing.
The work-energy relation, Eq. 4/3, for an inﬁnitesimal displacement is
dUЈ ϭ dT ϩ dV
where dUЈ is the work of the active forces and couples applied to the
body or to the system of bodies. Excluded from dUЈ are the work of

Article 6/6

Work-Energy Relations

463

gravitational forces and that of spring forces, which are accounted for in
the dV term. Dividing by dt gives the total power of the active forces and
couples as
Pϭ

dUЈ
˙ ˙ d (T ϩ V)
ϭTϩVϭ
dt
dt

Thus, we see that the power developed by the active forces and couples
equals the rate of change of the total mechanical energy of the body or
system of bodies.
We note from Eq. 6/9 that, for a given body, the ﬁrst term may be
written

˙
Tϭ

΂

d 1
dT
1
ϭ
mv ⅐ v ϩ I␻2
2
dt
dt 2
ϭ

΃

1
m(a ⅐ v ϩ v ⅐ a) ϩ I␻␻
˙
2

ϭ ma ⅐ v ϩ I␣(␻) ϭ R ⅐ v ϩ M␻

Savid Nunuk/PhotoResearchers, Inc.

where R is the resultant of all forces acting on the body and M is the resultant moment about the mass center G of all forces. The dot product
accounts for the case of curvilinear motion of the mass center, where a
and v are not in the same direction.

Power-generating wind turbines near Mojave, California.

464

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

SAMPLE PROBLEM 6/9

N
100

The wheel rolls up the incline on its hubs without slipping and is pulled by
the 100-N force applied to the cord wrapped around its outer rim. If the wheel
starts from rest, compute its angular velocity ␻ after its center has moved a distance of 3 m up the incline. The wheel has a mass of 40 kg with center of mass at
O and has a centroidal radius of gyration of 150 mm. Determine the power input
from the 100-N force at the end of the 3-m motion interval.

100 mm

200 mm
O

15°

ω
3 m vA

Solution.

Of the four forces shown on the free-body diagram of the wheel,

force does no work as long as the wheel does not slip. By use of the concept of the
instantaneous center C of zero velocity, we see that a point A on the cord to
which the 100-N force is applied has a velocity vA ϭ [(200 ϩ 100)/100]v. Hence,
point A on the cord moves a distance of (200 ϩ 100)/100 ϭ 3 times as far as the
center O. Thus, with the effect of the weight included in the U-term, the work
done on the wheel becomes

ᕢ

U1-2 ϭ 100

200 ϩ 100
(3) Ϫ (392 sin 15Њ)(3) ϭ 595 J
100

T1 ϭ 0

T2 ϭ 1 40(0.10␻)2 ϩ 1 40(0.15)2␻2
2
2
ϭ 0.650␻2

The work-energy equation gives
[T1 ϩ U1-2 ϭ T2]

0 ϩ 595 ϭ 0.650␻2

␻ ϭ 30.3 rad/s

392 N
OC

15°

v
100 mm

F
N

ᕡ Since the velocity of the instantaneous center C on the wheel is zero,
it follows that the rate at which the
friction force does work is continuously zero. Hence, F does no work as
long as the wheel does not slip. If
the wheel were rolling on a moving
platform, however, the friction force
would do work, even if the wheel
were not slipping.

weight down the plane does negative
work.

1

T ϭ 2 40[(0.15)2 ϩ (0.10)2]␻2 ϭ 0.650␻2

ᕣ Be careful to use the correct radius
in the expression v ϭ r␻ for the velocity of the center of the wheel.

The power input from the 100-N force when ␻ ϭ 30.3 rad/s is

ᕥ [P ϭ F ⅐ v]

v

N

ᕢ Note that the component of the

Alternatively, the kinetic energy of the wheel may be written

ᕤ [T ϭ 1 IC␻2]
2

100

Helpful Hints

The wheel has general plane motion, so that the initial and ﬁnal kinetic energies are

ᕣ [T ϭ 1 mv 2 ϩ 1 I␻2]
2
2

A

200
mm

ᕡ only the 100-N pull and the weight of 40(9.81) ϭ 392 N do work. The friction

P100 ϭ 100(0.3)(30.3) ϭ 908 W

Ans.

ᕤ Recall that IC ϭ I ϩ mOC2, where
I ϭ IO ϭ mkO2.

ᕥ The velocity here is that of the application point of the 100-N force.

Article 6/6

Work-Energy Relations

SAMPLE PROBLEM 6/10

D

24

″

The 4-ft slender bar weighs 40 lb with mass center at B and is released from
rest in the position for which ␪ is essentially zero. Point B is conﬁned to move in
the smooth vertical guide, while end A moves in the smooth horizontal guide and
compresses the spring as the bar falls. Determine (a) the angular velocity of the
bar as the position ␪ ϭ 30Њ is passed and (b) the velocity with which B strikes the
horizontal surface if the stiffness of the spring is 30 lb/in.

24

″

B

Solution.

With the friction and mass of the small rollers at A and B neglected,
the system may be treated as being conservative.

A

ϩ

D

΃

1 1 40 2 2
4 ␻ ϭ 1.449␻2
2 12 32.2

ω
B
vB

30°

vA

With a datum established at the initial position of the mass center B, our initial
and ﬁnal gravitational potential energies are
V1 ϭ 0

12″

C

″

΂

18″

24

΂ ΃

2

1 40 12
␻
2 32.2 12

Tϭ

θ

k

Part (a). For the ﬁrst interval of motion from ␪ ϭ 0 (state 1) to ␪ ϭ 30Њ (state 2),
the spring is not engaged, so that there is no Ve term in the energy equation. If
ᕡ we adopt the alternative of treating the work of the weight in the Vg term, then
there are no other forces which do work, and UЈ ϭ 0.
1-2
Since we have a constrained plane motion, there is a kinematic relation between the velocity vB of the center of mass and the angular velocity ␻ of the bar.
This relation is easily obtained by using the instantaneous center C of zero velocity and noting that vB ϭ CB␻. Thus, the kinetic energy of the bar in the 30Њ position becomes
[T ϭ 1 mv2 ϩ 1 I␻2]
2
2

465

A

V2 ϭ 40(2 cos 30Њ Ϫ 2) ϭ Ϫ10.72 ft-lb

We now substitute into the energy equation and obtain

Helpful Hints

[T1 ϩ V1 ϩ UЈ ϭ T2 ϩ V2]
1-2

ᕡ We recognize that the forces acting

0 ϩ 0 ϩ 0 ϭ 1.449␻2 Ϫ 10.72
␻ ϭ 2.72 rad/sec

Ans.

Part (b). We deﬁne state 3 as that for which ␪ ϭ 90Њ. The initial and ﬁnal
spring potential energies are

ᕢ

[Ve ϭ 1 kx2]
2

ᕢ If we convert k to lb/ft, we have

1
1
ϭ 45 ft-lb
V3 ϭ (30)(24 Ϫ 18)2
2
12

V1 ϭ 0

Ve ϭ

In the ﬁnal horizontal position, point A has no velocity, so that the bar is, in
effect, rotating about A. Hence, its ﬁnal kinetic energy is
[T ϭ 1 IA␻2]
2

T3 ϭ

΂

1 1 40 2
4
2 3 32.2

΃΂24/12΃
vB

2

on the bar at A and B are normal to
the respective directions of motion
and, hence, do no work.

΂

1
lb
30
2
in.

Ϫ
΃΂12 in.΃΂24 12 18 ft΃
ft

2

ϭ 45 ft-lb
Always check the consistency of your
units.

ϭ 0.828vB2

The ﬁnal gravitational potential energy is
[Vg ϭ Wh]

V3 ϭ 40(Ϫ2) ϭ Ϫ80 ft-lb

Substituting into the energy equation gives
[T1 ϩ V1 ϩ UЈ ϭ T3 ϩ V3]
1-3

0 ϩ 0 ϩ 0 ϭ 0.828vB2 ϩ 45 Ϫ 80
vB ϭ 6.50 ft/sec

Ans.

Alternatively, if the bar alone constitutes the system, the active-force diagram shows the weight, which does positive work, and the spring force kx, which
does negative work. We would then write
[T1 ϩ U1-3 ϭ T3]

80 Ϫ 45 ϭ 0.828vB2

which is identical with the previous result.

40 lb
kx
(Alternative Active-Force
Diagram)

466

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

SAMPLE PROBLEM 6/11

vB

In the mechanism shown, each of the two wheels has a mass of 30 kg and a
centroidal radius of gyration of 100 mm. Each link OB has a mass of 10 kg and
may be treated as a slender bar. The 7-kg collar at B slides on the ﬁxed vertical
shaft with negligible friction. The spring has a stiffness k ϭ 30 kN/m and is contacted by the bottom of the collar when the links reach the horizontal position. If
the collar is released from rest at the position ␪ ϭ 45Њ and if friction is sufﬁcient
to prevent the wheels from slipping, determine (a) the velocity vB of the collar as
it ﬁrst strikes the spring and (b) the maximum deformation x of the spring.

m

A

5m

37

v = vO
150
mm

θ

B
θ 37

5m

Vg=0

O

m

A

O
k

Solution.

The mechanism executes plane motion and is conservative with the
neglect of kinetic friction losses. We deﬁne states 1, 2, and 3 to be at ␪ ϭ 45Њ, ␪ ϭ
0, and maximum spring deﬂection, respectively. The datum for zero gravitational potential energy Vg is conveniently taken through O as shown.

(a) For the interval from ␪ ϭ 45Њ to ␪ ϭ 0, we note that the initial and ﬁnal kinetic energies of the wheels are zero since each wheel starts from rest and momentarily comes to rest at ␪ ϭ 0. Also, at position 2, each link is merely rotating
about its point O so that
T2 ϭ [2( 1 IO␻2 )]links ϩ [ 1 mv2]collar
2
2
ϭ

΂

vB
1
10(0.375)2
3
0.375

΃

2

ϩ

1
7v 2 ϭ 6.83vB2
2 B

The collar at B drops a distance 0.375/Ί2 ϭ 0.265 m so that
V1 ϭ 2(10)(9.81)

0.265
ϩ 7(9.81)(0.265) ϭ 44.2 J
2

V2 ϭ 0
Helpful Hint

ᕡ Also, UЈ ϭ 0. Hence,
1-2
[T1 ϩ V1 ϩ UЈ ϭ T2 ϩ V2]
1-2

ᕡ With the work of the weight of the
0 ϩ 44.2 ϩ 0 ϭ 6.83vB2 ϩ 0
vB ϭ 2.54 m/s

Ans.

(b) At the condition of maximum deformation x of the spring, all parts are momentarily at rest, which makes T3 ϭ 0. Thus,
[T1 ϩ V1 ϩ UЈ ϭ T3 ϩ V3]
1-3

0 ϩ 2(10)(9.81)

0.265
ϩ 7(9.81)(0.265) ϩ 0
2

ϭ 0 Ϫ 2(10)(9.81)

x
΂2΃ Ϫ 7(9.81)x ϩ

1
3 2
2 (30)(10 )x

Solution for the positive value of x gives
x ϭ 60.1 mm

Ans.

It should be noted that the results of parts (a) and (b) involve a very simple
net energy change despite the fact that the mechanism has undergone a fairly
complex sequence of motions. Solution of this and similar problems by other
than a work-energy approach is not an inviting prospect.

collar B included in the potentialenergy terms, there are no other
forces external to the system which
do work. The friction force acting
under each wheel does no work since
the wheel does not slip, and, of
course, the normal force does no
work here. Hence, UЈ ϭ 0.
1-2

150
mm

Article 6/6

PROBLEMS
(In the following problems neglect any energy loss due to
kinetic friction unless otherwise instructed.)

Problems

467

x
8″

2″

Introductory Problems
O

6/109 The uniform slender bar of mass m and length L is
released from rest when in the horizontal position
shown. Determine its angular velocity and masscenter speed as it passes the vertical position.

1
10

Problem 6/111
m
L
––
4

O

3L
––
4

6/112 The uniform quarter-circular sector is released from
rest with one edge vertical as shown. Determine its
subsequent maximum angular velocity.

Problem 6/109
O

6/110 The slender rod (mass m, length L) has a particle
(mass 2m) attached to one end. If the body is
nudged away from the vertical equilibrium position
shown, determine its angular speed after it has
rotated 180Њ.

b

m

2m
Vertical
L
––
2

O
L
––
2

m

Problem 6/112

6/113 The velocity of the 8-kg cylinder is 0.3 m/s at a
certain instant. What is its speed v after dropping
an additional 1.5 m? The mass of the grooved
drum is 12 kg, its centroidal radius of gyration is
k ϭ 210 mm, and the radius of its groove is ri ϭ
200 mm. The frictional moment at O is a constant
3 N ⅐ m.

Problem 6/110
m = 12 kg
k = 210 mm

6/111 The 32.2-lb wheel is released from rest and rolls on
its hubs without slipping. Calculate the velocity v
of the center O of the wheel after it has moved a
distance x ϭ 10 ft down the incline. The radius of
gyration of the wheel about O is 5 in.

O

ri = 200 mm

ro = 300 mm

8 kg

Problem 6/113

468

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

6/114 The log is suspended by the two parallel 5-m cables
and used as a battering ram. At what angle ␪ should
the log be released from rest in order to strike the
object to be smashed with a velocity of 4 m/s?

A

r

5m

θ

5m

θ
θ
B

r

v = 4 m/s
Problem 6/114

6/115 The T-shaped body of total mass m is constructed of
uniform rod. If it is released from rest while in the
position shown, determine the vertical force reaction at O as it passes the vertical position (120Њ after
release).

b
––
4
b
––
4

b

θ

Problem 6/116

6/117 The 15-kg slender bar OA is released from rest in
the vertical position and compresses the spring of
stiffness k ϭ 20 kN/m as the horizontal position is
passed. Determine the proper setting of the spring,
by specifying the distance h, which will result in
the bar having an angular velocity ␻ ϭ 4 rad/s as it
crosses the horizontal position. What is the effect of
x on the dynamics of the problem?

30°

A

O

Problem 6/115

6/116 The two wheels of Prob. 6/82, shown again here,
represent two extreme conditions of distribution of
mass. For case A all of the mass m is assumed to be
concentrated in the center of the hoop in the axial
bar of negligible diameter. For case B all of the
mass m is assumed to be concentrated in the rim.
Determine the velocity of the center of each hoop
after it has traveled a distance x down the incline
from rest. The hoops roll without slipping.

600 mm

O

h
ω

x = 400 mm
Problem 6/117

Article 6/6
6/118 The wheel is composed of a 10-kg hoop stiffened by
four thin spokes, each with a mass of 2 kg. A horizontal force of 40 N is applied to the wheel initially
at rest. Calculate the angular velocity of the wheel
after its center has moved 3 m. Friction is sufﬁcient
to prevent slipping.
300 mm

40 N
O

Problems

469

Representative Problems
6/120 The 1.2-kg uniform slender bar rotates freely about
a horizontal axis through O. The system is released
from rest when it is in the horizontal position ␪ ϭ 0
where the spring is unstretched. If the bar is observed to momentarily stop in the position ␪ ϭ 50Њ,
determine the spring constant k. For your computed value of k, what is the angular velocity of the
bar when ␪ ϭ 25Њ?
B

O
0.6 m
k
Problem 6/118

O

6/119 A steady 5-lb force is applied normal to the handle
of the hand-operated grinder. The gear inside the
housing with its shaft and attached handle together
weigh 3.94 lb and have a radius of gyration about
their axis of 2.85 in. The grinding wheel with its attached shaft and pinion (inside housing) together
weigh 1.22 lb and have a radius of gyration of 2.14 in.
If the gear ratio between gear and pinion is 4:1, calculate the speed N of the grinding wheel after 6 complete revolutions of the handle starting from rest.

N

θ

A

0.6 m

1.2 kg
0.2 m
Problem 6/120

6/121 Specify the unstretched length l0 of the spring of
stiffness k ϭ 1400 N/m which will result in a
velocity of 0.25 m/s for the contact at A if the toggle
is given a slight nudge from its null position at
␪ ϭ 0. The toggle has a mass of 1.5 kg and a radius
of gyration about O of 55 mm. Motion occurs in the
horizontal plane.
θ=3
0°

50 mm
A

l O
50 mm
5 lb

60 mm

6″

Problem 6/121
Problem 6/119

470

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

6/122 The 50-kg ﬂywheel has a radius of gyration k ϭ 0.4 m
about its shaft axis and is subjected to the torque
M ϭ 2(1 Ϫ eϪ0.1␪) N ⅐ m, where ␪ is in radians. If the
ﬂywheel is at rest when ␪ ϭ 0, determine its angular velocity after 5 revolutions.

6/124 The two identical links, each of length b and mass
m, may be treated as uniform slender bars. If they
are released from rest in the position shown with
end A constrained by the smooth vertical guide,
determine the velocity v with which A reaches O
with ␪ essentially zero.

A
M

b

θ

B

Problem 6/122

6/123 The 12-lb lever OA with 10-in. radius of gyration
about O is initially at rest in the vertical position
(␪ ϭ 90Њ), where the attached spring of stiffness
k ϭ 3 lb/in. is unstretched. Calculate the constant
moment M applied to the lever through its shaft at
O which will give the lever an angular velocity
␻ ϭ 4 rad/sec as the lever reaches the horizontal
position ␪ ϭ 0.
A

b

O

Problem 6/124

6/125 The torsional spring has a stiffness of 30 N ⅐ m/rad
and is undeﬂected when the 6-kg uniform slender
bar is in the upright position. If the bar is released
from rest in the horizontal position shown, determine its angular velocity ␻ as it passes the vertical
position. Friction is negligible.

ω

k = 3 lb/in.
G
M

θ

O

15″

K

8″
0.8 m
15″
Problem 6/123

Problem 6/125

O

Article 6/6
6/126 The wheel consists of a 4-kg rim of 250-mm radius
with hub and spokes of negligible mass. The wheel
is mounted on the 3-kg yoke OA with mass center
at G and with a radius of gyration about O of 350 mm.
If the assembly is released from rest in the horizontal position shown and if the wheel rolls on the circular surface without slipping, compute the velocity
of point A when it reaches AЈ.

471

6/128 The center of the 200-lb wheel with centroidal
radius of gyration of 4 in. has a velocity of 2 ft/sec
down the incline in the position shown. Calculate
the normal reaction N under the wheel as it rolls
past position A. Assume that no slipping occurs.

30°

250 mm
300 mm

6″

24″

G

A

Problems

O

12″
A

500 mm

Problem 6/128

A′

Problem 6/126

6/127 The uniform slender bar ABC weighs 6 lb and is
initially at rest with end A bearing against the stop
in the horizontal guide. When a constant couple
M ϭ 72 lb-in. is applied to end C, the bar rotates
causing end A to strike the side of the vertical
guide with a velocity of 10 ft/sec. Calculate the loss
of energy ⌬E due to friction in the guides and
rollers. The mass of the rollers may be neglected.
M

8″

B
8″
45°
A

Problem 6/127

C

6/129 The uniform slender bar of mass m pivots freely
about a horizontal axis through O. If the bar is
released from rest in the horizontal position shown
where the spring is unstretched, it is observed to
rotate a maximum of 30Њ clockwise. The spring constant k ϭ 200 N/m and the distance b ϭ 200 mm.
Determine (a) the mass m of the bar and (b) the
angular velocity ␻ of the bar when the angular
displacement is 15Њ clockwise from the release
position.
k
b
––
4

C
O

m
3b
––
4
Problem 6/129

A

B
b
––
4

472

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

6/130 The system is released from rest when the angle
␪ ϭ 90Њ. Determine the angular velocity of the uniform slender bar when ␪ equals 60Њ. Use the values
m1 ϭ 1 kg, m2 ϭ 1.25 kg, and b ϭ 0.4 m.
2b

6/132 The electric motor shown is delivering 4 kW at
1725 rev/min to a pump which it drives. Calculate
the angle ␦ through which the motor deﬂects under
load if the stiffness of each of its four spring
mounts is 15 kN/m. In what direction does the
motor shaft turn?

O
θ

C

b
A
δ

m1
2b

m2

200 mm
Problem 6/132

B
Problem 6/130

6/131 The two identical steel frames with the dimensions
shown are fabricated from the same bar stock and
are hinged at the midpoints A and B of their sides.
If the frame is resting in the position shown on a
horizontal surface with negligible friction, determine the velocity v with which each of the upper
ends of the frame hits the horizontal surface if the
cord at C is cut.

6/133 The two 4.2-kg uniform right-angle bars are
released from rest when in the position ␪ ϭ 0, at
which the spring of modulus k ϭ 450 N/m is unstretched. The bars then rotate in a vertical plane
about the ﬁxed centers of the attached light gears,
thus maintaining the same angle ␪ for both bars.
Determine the angular speed of the bars as the
position ␪ ϭ 20Њ is passed.
k = 450 N/m

60 mm

c
b
c

40 mm
θ

b

θ

θ

A
B
b

120 mm

b
C

Problem 6/131

Problem 6/133

180 mm

Article 6/6
6/134 A lid-support mechanism is being designed for a
storage chest to limit the angular velocity of the
10-lb uniform lid to 1.5 rad/sec for ␪ ϭ 0 when it is
released from rest with ␪ essentially equal to 90Њ.
Two identical mechanisms are included as indicated on the pictorial sketch. Specify the necessary
stiffness k of each of the two springs, which are
compressed 2 in. upon closure. Neglect the weight
of the links and any friction in the sliding collars C.
Also, the thickness of the lid is small compared
with its other dimensions.

473

B
200
mm

50
mm
400
mm

A
θ

200
mm

M

A
A

O

B

B
Problem 6/135

O
C

Problems

C

6/136 The system is at rest with the spring unstretched
when ␪ ϭ 0. The 5-kg uniform slender bar is then
given a slight clockwise nudge. The value of b is
0.4 m. (a) If the bar comes to momentary rest when
␪ ϭ 40Њ, determine the spring constant k. (b) For
the value k ϭ 90 N/m, ﬁnd the angular velocity of
the bar when ␪ ϭ 25Њ.

A
14″

B
6″
10″

θ

2″

O
A

C
2″

1.25b
Problem 6/134

6/135 Each of the two links has a mass of 2 kg and a centroidal radius of gyration of 60 mm. The slider at B
has a mass of 3 kg and moves freely in the vertical
guide. The spring has a stiffness of 6 kN/m. If a
constant torque M ϭ 20 N ⅐ m is applied to link OA
through its shaft at O starting from the rest position at ␪ ϭ 45Њ, determine the angular velocity ␻ of
OA when ␪ ϭ 0.

θ

k

b

O

Problem 6/136

474

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

6/137 The body shown is constructed of uniform slender
rod and consists of a ring of radius r attached to a
straight section of length 2r. The body pivots freely
about a ball-and-socket joint at O. If the body is at
rest in the vertical position shown and is given a
slight nudge, compute its angular velocity ␻ after a
90Њ rotation about (a) axis A-A and (b) axis B-B.

6/139 The 8-kg crank OA, with mass center at G and radius of gyration about O of 0.22 m, is connected to
the 12-kg uniform slender bar AB. If the linkage is
released from rest in the position shown, compute
the velocity v of end B as OA swings through the
vertical.
0.4 m
A

O

0.18 m

r
2r

G

B

A
1.0 m

O

0.8 m

A
B
Problem 6/137

B

6/138 A facility for testing the performance of motorized
golf carts consists of an endless belt where the
angle ␪ can be adjusted. The cart of mass m is
slowly brought up to its rated ground speed v with
the braking torque M on the upper pulley constantly adjusted so that the cart remains in a ﬁxed
position A on the test stand. With no cart on the
belt, a torque M0 is required on the pulley to overcome friction and turn the pulleys regardless of
speed. Friction is sufﬁcient to prevent the wheels
from slipping on the belt. Determine an expression
for the power P absorbed by the braking torque M.
Do the static friction forces between the wheels and
the belt do work?

Problem 6/139

6/140 The ﬁgure shows the cross section of a uniform
200-lb ventilator door hinged about its upper horizontal edge at O. The door is controlled by the
spring-loaded cable which passes over the small
pulley at A. The spring has a stiffness of 15 lb per
foot of stretch and is undeformed when ␪ ϭ 0. If
the door is released from rest in the horizontal position, determine the maximum angular velocity ␻
reached by the door and the corresponding angle ␪.

k
A

A

θ

r

v

60°
M
θ

Problem 6/138

v

Problem 6/140

O

Article 6/6
6/141 Motive power for the experimental 10-Mg bus comes
from the energy stored in a rotating ﬂywheel which
it carries. The ﬂywheel has a mass of 1500 kg and a
radius of gyration of 500 mm and is brought up to a
maximum speed of 4000 rev/min. If the bus starts
from rest and acquires a speed of 72 km/h at the top
of a hill 20 m above the starting position, compute
the reduced speed N of the ﬂywheel. Assume that
10 percent of the energy taken from the ﬂywheel is
lost. Neglect the rotational energy of the wheels of
the bus. The 10-Mg mass includes the ﬂywheel.

Problems

475

B
8′
A
10′
8′

Problem 6/143

6/144 The uniform slender rod of length l is released from
rest in the dashed vertical position. With what
speed vA does end A strike the 30Њ incline? Neglect
the small mass and friction of the end rollers.

Problem 6/141

6/142 The two identical uniform bars are released from
rest from the position shown in the vertical plane.
Determine the angular velocity ␻ of AB when the
bars become collinear.
B

b

A

x
A
l

45°
l
b
B 30°
45°
C
45°
Problem 6/142

6/143 The ﬁgure shows the cross section of a garage door
which is a uniform rectangular panel 8 by 8 ft and
weighing 200 lb. The door carries two spring assemblies, one on each side of the door, like the one
shown. Each spring has a stiffness of 50 lb/ft and is
unstretched when the door is in the open position
shown. If the door is released from rest in this position, calculate the velocity of the edge at A as it
strikes the garage ﬂoor.

Problem 6/144

476

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

6/145 The 10-kg double wheel with radius of gyration
of 125 mm about O is connected to the spring of
stiffness k ϭ 600 N/m by a cord which is wrapped
securely around the inner hub. If the wheel is released from rest on the incline with the spring
stretched 225 mm, calculate the maximum velocity
v of its center O during the ensuing motion. The
wheel rolls without slipping.

6/146 Motion of the 600-mm slender bar of mass 4 kg is
controlled by the constrained movement of its small
rollers A and B of negligible mass and friction. The
bar starts from rest in the horizontal position with
␪ ϭ 0 and moves in the vertical plane under the action of the constant force P ϭ 50 N applied normal
to the bar at end C. Calculate the velocity v with
which roller A strikes the wall of the vertical guide
at ␪ ϭ 90Њ.
C

k
75 mm

m

0m

30

O
B
200 mm

m

0m

30
1

θ

5

A
Problem 6/145
Problem 6/146

P

Article 6/7

6/7

Acceleration from Work-Energy; Virtual Work

Acceleration from Work-Energy;
Virtual Work

In addition to using the work-energy equation to determine the velocities due to the action of forces acting over ﬁnite displacements, we may
also use the equation to establish the instantaneous accelerations of the
members of a system of interconnected bodies as a result of the active
forces applied. We may also modify the equation to determine the conﬁguration of such a system when it undergoes a constant acceleration.

Work-Energy Equation for Differential Motions
For an inﬁnitesimal interval of motion, Eq. 4/3 becomes
dUЈ ϭ dT ϩ dV
The term dUЈ represents the total work done by all active nonpotential
forces acting on the system under consideration during the inﬁnitesimal
displacement of the system. The work of potential forces is included in
the dV-term. If we use the subscript i to denote a representative body of
the interconnected system, the differential change in kinetic energy T
for the entire system becomes
dT ϭ d(Σ 1mivi2 ϩ Σ 1 I i␻i2) ϭ Σmivi dvi ϩ ΣI i␻i d␻i
2
2
where d vi and d␻i are the respective changes in the magnitudes of the
velocities and where the summation is taken over all bodies of the system. But for each body, mivi d vi ϭ miai ⅐ d si and Ii␻i d␻i ϭ Ii␣i d␪i,
where dsi represents the inﬁnitesimal linear displacement of the center
of mass and where d␪i represents the inﬁnitesimal angular displacement
of the body in the plane of motion. We note that ai ⅐ d si is identical to
(ai)t d si, where (ai)t is the component of ai along the tangent to the curve
described by the mass center of the body in question. Also ␣i represents
¨
␪ i, the angular acceleration of the representative body. Consequently,
for the entire system
dT ϭ Σmiai ⅐ d si ϩ ΣIi␣i d␪i
This change may also be written as
dT ϭ ΣRi ⅐ d si ϩ ΣMGi ⅐ d␪i
where Ri and MGi are the resultant force and resultant couple acting on
body i and where d␪i ϭ d␪ik. These last two equations merely show us
that the differential change in kinetic energy equals the differential
work done on the system by the resultant forces and resultant couples
acting on all the bodies of the system.
The term dV represents the differential change in the total gravitational potential energy Vg and the total elastic potential energy Ve and
has the form
1

dV ϭ d(Σmighi ϩ Σ 2 kj xj2) ϭ Σmig dhi ϩ Σkj xj dxj

477

478

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

where hi represents the vertical distance of the center of mass of the
representative body of mass mi above any convenient datum plane and
where xj stands for the deformation, tensile or compressive, of a representative elastic member of the system (spring) whose stiffness is kj.
The complete expression for dUЈ may now be written as
dUЈ ϭ Σmiai ⅐ d si ϩ ΣIi␣i d␪i ϩ Σmi g dhi ϩ Σkj xj dxj

(6/11)

When Eq. 6/11 is applied to a system of one degree of freedom, the terms
miai ⅐ d si and Ii␣i d␪i will be positive if the accelerations are in the same
direction as the respective displacements and negative if they are in the
opposite direction. Equation 6/11 has the advantage of relating the accelerations to the active forces directly, which eliminates the need for dismembering the system and then eliminating the internal forces and
reactive forces by simultaneous solution of the force-mass-acceleration
equations for each member.

Virtual Work
In Eq. 6/11 the differential motions are differential changes in the
real or actual displacements which occur. For a mechanical system
which assumes a steady-state conﬁguration during constant acceleration, we often ﬁnd it convenient to introduce the concept of virtual
work. The concepts of virtual work and virtual displacement were introduced and used to establish equilibrium conﬁgurations for static systems of interconnected bodies (see Chapter 7 of Vol. 1 Statics).
A virtual displacement is any assumed and arbitrary displacement,
linear or angular, away from the natural or actual position. For a system of connected bodies, the virtual displacements must be consistent
with the constraints of the system. For example, when one end of a link
is hinged about a ﬁxed pivot, the virtual displacement of the other end
must be normal to the line joining the two ends. Such requirements for
displacements consistent with the constraints are purely kinematic and
provide what are known as the equations of constraint.
If a set of virtual displacements satisfying the equations of constraint and therefore consistent with the constraints is assumed for a
mechanical system, the proper relationship between the coordinates
which specify the conﬁguration of the system will be determined by applying the work-energy relationship of Eq. 6/11, expressed in terms of
virtual changes. Thus,
␦UЈ ϭ Σmiai ⅐ ␦si ϩ ΣIi␣i ␦␪i ϩ Σmi g ␦hi ϩ Σkj xj ␦xj

(6/11a)

It is customary to use the differential symbol d to refer to differential
changes in the real displacements, whereas the symbol ␦ is used to signify virtual changes, that is, differential changes which are assumed
rather than real.

Article 6/7

Acceleration from Work-Energy; Virtual Work

SAMPLE PROBLEM 6/12

479

80 N

The movable rack A has a mass of 3 kg, and rack B is ﬁxed. The gear has a
mass of 2 kg and a radius of gyration of 60 mm. In the position shown, the
spring, which has a stiffness of 1.2 kN/m, is stretched a distance of 40 mm. For
the instant represented, determine the acceleration a of rack A under the action
of the 80-N force. The plane of the ﬁgure is vertical.
80
mm

Solution.

The given ﬁgure represents the active-force diagram for the entire

ᕡ system, which is conservative.

During an inﬁnitesimal upward displacement dx of rack A, the work dUЈ
done on the system is 80 dx, where x is in meters, and this work equals the sum
of the corresponding changes in the total energy of the system. These changes,
which appear in Eq. 6/11, are as follows:

A

B

[dT ϭ Σmiai ⅐ dsi ϩ ΣIi␣i d␪i]
dTrack ϭ 3a dx

ᕢ

Helpful Hints

a/2 dx/2
a dx
dTgear ϭ 2
ϩ 2(0.06)2
ϭ 0.781a dx
2 2
0.08 0.08

ᕡ Note that none of the remaining
forces external to the system do any
work. The work done by the weight
and by the spring is accounted for in
the potential-energy terms.

The change in potential energies of the system, from Eq. 6/11, becomes
[dV ϭ Σmi g dhi ϩ Σkj xj dxj]

ᕢ Note that ai for the gear is its mass-

dVrack ϭ 3g dx ϭ 3(9.81) dx ϭ 29.4 dx

center acceleration, which is half
that for the rack A. Also, its displacement is dx/2. For the rolling gear,
the angular acceleration from a ϭ r␣
becomes ␣i ϭ (a/2)/0.08, and the angular displacement from ds ϭ r d␪
becomes d␪i ϭ (dx/2)/0.08.

dVgear ϭ 2g(dx/2) ϭ g dx ϭ 9.81 dx

ᕣ

dVspring ϭ kj xj dxj ϭ 1200(0.04) dx/2 ϭ 24 dx
Substitution into Eq. 6/11 gives us
80 dx ϭ 3a dx ϩ 0.781a dx ϩ 29.4 dx ϩ 9.81 dx ϩ 24 dx

ᕣ Note here that the displacement of

Canceling dx and solving for a give
a ϭ 16.76/3.78 ϭ 4.43 m/s2

Ans.

We see that using the work-energy method for an inﬁnitesimal displacement has given us the direct relation between the applied force and the resulting
acceleration. It was unnecessary to dismember the system, draw two free-body
diagrams, apply ΣF ϭ ma twice, apply ΣMG ϭ I␣ and F ϭ kx, eliminate unwanted terms, and ﬁnally solve for a.

the spring is one-half that of the
rack. Hence, xi ϭ x/2.

480

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

SAMPLE PROBLEM 6/13

s2

A constant force P is applied to end A of the two identical and uniform links
and causes them to move to the right in their vertical plane with a horizontal acceleration a. Determine the steady-state angle ␪ made by the bars with one another.

s1

A
P

Vg = 0
l/2

l/2
l/2

θ

a

l/2

Solution.

The ﬁgure constitutes the active-force diagram for the system. To
ﬁnd the steady-state conﬁguration, consider a virtual displacement of each bar
from the natural position assumed during the acceleration. Measurement of the
displacement with respect to end A eliminates any work done by force P during
the virtual displacement. Thus,
Helpful Hints

ᕡ
ᕢ

␦UЈ ϭ 0

ᕡ Note that we use the symbol ␦ to refer
to an assumed or virtual differential
change rather than the symbol d,
which refers to an inﬁnitesimal
change in the real displacement.

The terms involving acceleration in Eq. 6/11a reduce to
ma ⅐ ␦s ϭ ma(Ϫ␦s1) ϩ ma(Ϫ␦s2)
␪
␪
΄ ΂2l sin 2΃ ϩ ␦ ΂3l sin 2΃΅
2
␪
ϭ Ϫma ΂l cos ␦␪΃
2
ϭ Ϫma ␦

ᕣ
ᕤ

ᕢ Here we are evaluating the work
done by the resultant forces and
couples in the virtual displacement.
Note that ␣ ϭ 0 for both bars.

We choose the horizontal line through A as the datum for zero potential energy. Thus, the potential energy of the links is

ᕣ We have chosen to use the angle ␪ to

΃

describe the conﬁguration of the
links, although we could have used
the distance between the two ends of
the links just as well.

and the virtual change in potential energy becomes

ᕤ The last two terms in Eq. 6/11a ex-

΂

␪
l
Vg ϭ 2mg Ϫ cos
2
2

΂

press the virtual changes in gravitational and elastic potential energy.

΃

mgl
␪
␪
l
␦Vg ϭ ␦ Ϫ2mg cos
sin ␦␪
ϭ
2
2
2
2
Substitution into the work-energy equation for virtual changes, Eq. 6/11a, gives
0 ϭ Ϫmal cos

mgl
␪
␪
␦␪ ϩ
sin ␦␪
2
2
2

from which
2a
␪ ϭ 2 tanϪ1 g

Ans.

Again, in this problem we see that the work-energy approach obviated the
necessity for dismembering the system, drawing separate free-body diagrams,
applying motion equations, eliminating unwanted terms, and solving for ␪.

Article 6/7

PROBLEMS

Problems

A

B

Introductory Problems

θ

6/147 The position of the horizontal platform of mass m0
is controlled by the parallel slender links of masses
m and 2m. Determine the initial angular acceleration ␣ of the links as they start from their supported
position shown under the action of a force P applied
normal to AB at its end.
C

D
m0

b

b
θ

B

m

E

481

θ

b

b

O
Problem 6/149

6/150 Links A and B each weigh 8 lb, and bar C weighs
12 lb. Calculate the angle ␪ assumed by the links
if the body to which they are pinned is given a
steady horizontal acceleration a of 4 ft/sec2.

θ

O

a
2m

b
P

θ

A

18″

θ

18″

A

B

Problem 6/147

6/148 The uniform slender bar of mass m is shown in its
equilibrium position in the vertical plane before the
couple M is applied to the end of the bar. Determine
the initial angular acceleration ␣ of the bar upon
application of M. The mass of each guide roller is
negligible.

θ

k
b
M
b

C
Problem 6/150

6/151 The mechanism shown moves in the vertical plane.
The vertical bar AB weighs 10 lb, and each of the
two links weighs 6 lb with mass center at G and
with a radius of gyration of 10 in. about its bearing
(O or C). The spring has a stiffness of 15 lb/ft and
an unstretched length of 18 in. If the support at D
is suddenly withdrawn, determine the initial angular acceleration ␣ of the links.
A

Problem 6/148

6/149 The two uniform slender bars are hinged at O and
supported on the horizontal surface by their end
rollers of negligible mass. If the bars are released
from rest in the position shown, determine their
initial angular acceleration ␣ as they collapse in the
vertical plane. (Suggestion: Make use of the instantaneous center of zero velocity in writing the expression for dT.)

18″
60°

G

O

18″

B
G

60°

18″
C

—– —–
OG = CG = 8″

D

Problem 6/151

482

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

Representative Problems
6/152 The load of mass m is given an upward acceleration a
from its supported rest position by the application of
the forces P. Neglect the mass of the links compared
with m and determine the initial acceleration a.
P

6/154 The box and load of the dump truck have a mass m
with mass center at G and a moment of inertia IA
about the pivot at A. Determine the angular acceleration ␣ of the box when it is started from rest in
the position shown under the application of the
couple M to link CD. Neglect the mass of the links.
The ﬁgure ABDC is a parallelogram.

P

b

b

θ

G

θ

b

b

b

θ

a

θ

θ M

A
m

B

D

C

a

Problem 6/152

Problem 6/154

6/153 The cargo box of the food-delivery truck for aircraft
servicing has a loaded mass m and is elevated by
the application of a couple M on the lower end of
the link which is hinged to the truck frame. The
horizontal slots allow the linkage to unfold as the
cargo box is elevated. Determine the upward acceleration of the box in terms of h for a given value of
M. Neglect the mass of the links.

6/155 Each of the uniform bars OA and OB has a mass of
2 kg and is freely hinged at O to the vertical shaft,
which is given an upward acceleration a ϭ g/2. The
links which connect the light collar C to the bars
have negligible mass, and the collar slides freely on
the shaft. The spring has a stiffness k ϭ 130 N/m
and is uncompressed for the position equivalent to
␪ ϭ 0. Calculate the angle ␪ assumed by the bars
under conditions of steady acceleration.
a

m
b

b

b

b

M

h

C

B
200

A
200

200

200
200

Problem 6/153

θ

θ
200

O
Dimensions in millimeters
Problem 6/155

Article 6/7
6/156 The linkage consists of the two slender bars and
moves in the horizontal plane under the inﬂuence
of force P. Link OC has a mass m and link AC has a
mass 2m. The sliding block at B has negligible
mass. Without dismembering the system, determine
the initial angular acceleration ␣ of the links as P is
applied at A with the links initially at rest. (Suggestion: Replace P by its equivalent force-couple system.)

Problems

483

6/158 Each of the three identical uniform panels of a segmented industrial door has mass m and is guided in
the tracks (one shown dashed). Determine the horizontal acceleration a of the upper panel under the
action of the force P. Neglect any friction in the
guide rollers.
P

C

b

θ θ

Horizontal

b
45°

B
O
b

A
Vertical
P
Problem 6/156
Problem 6/158

6/157 The portable work platform is elevated by means of
the two hydraulic cylinders articulated at points C.
The pressure in each cylinder produces a force F. The
platform, man, and load have a combined mass m,
and the mass of the linkage is small and may be neglected. Determine the upward acceleration a of the
platform and show that it is independent of both b
and ␪.

6/159 The mechanical tachometer measures the rotational speed N of the shaft by the horizontal motion of the collar B along the rotating shaft. This
movement is caused by the centrifugal action of the
two 12-oz weights A, which rotate with the shaft.
Collar C is ﬁxed to the shaft. Determine the rotational speed N of the shaft for a reading ␤ ϭ 15Њ.
The stiffness of the spring is 5 lb/in., and it is uncompressed when ␪ ϭ 0 and ␤ ϭ 0. Neglect the
weights of the links.
y
β

b

A

b
1.5″

5/8″

θ

B

B

θ

θ

1.5″

b/2
b/2

1/4″

b/2
b/2

N
C

1/4″

θ

C

B

C
A
Problem 6/159

Problem 6/157

484

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

6/160 A planetary gear system is shown, where the gear
teeth are omitted from the ﬁgure. Each of the three
identical planet gears A, B, and C has a mass of
0.8 kg, a radius r ϭ 50 mm, and a radius of gyration of 30 mm about its center. The spider E has a
mass of 1.2 kg and a radius of gyration about O of
60 mm. The ring gear D has a radius R ϭ 150 mm
and is ﬁxed. If a torque M ϭ 5 N ⅐ m is applied to
the shaft of the spider at O, determine the initial
angular acceleration ␣ of the spider.

6/162 The aerial tower shown is designed to elevate a
workman in a vertical direction. An internal mechanism at B maintains the angle between AB and
BC at twice the angle ␪ between BC and the
ground. If the combined mass of the man and the
cab is 200 kg and if all other masses are neglected,
determine the torque M applied to BC at C and the
torque MB in the joint at B required to give the cab
an initial vertical acceleration of 1.2 m/s2 when it is
started from rest in the position ␪ ϭ 30Њ.

D

A

A

6m
E
O

R

2θ

B
C

M

r

6m

M
θ

C

B
Problem 6/162
Problem 6/160

6/161 The sector and attached wheels are released from
rest in the position shown in the vertical plane.
Each wheel is a solid circular disk weighing 12 lb
and rolls on the ﬁxed circular path without slipping. The sector weighs 18 lb and is closely approximated by one-fourth of a solid circular disk of 16-in.
radius. Determine the initial angular acceleration ␣
of the sector.

6/163 The uniform arm OA has a mass of 4 kg, and the
gear D has a mass of 5 kg with a radius of gyration
about its center of 64 mm. The large gear B is ﬁxed
and cannot rotate. If the arm and small gear are released from rest in the position shown in the vertical plane, calculate the initial angular acceleration
␣ of OA.
B

D
8″
16″

O

O

A

8″

Problem 6/161

200
mm
Problem 6/163

100
mm

Article 6/7
6/164 The vehicle is used to transport supplies to and
from the bottom of the 25-percent grade. Each pair
of wheels, one at A and the other at B, has a mass
of 140 kg with a radius of gyration of 150 mm. The
drum C has a mass of 40 kg and a radius of gyration of 100 mm. The total mass of the vehicle is 520
kg. The vehicle is released from rest with a restraining force T of 500 N in the control cable
which passes around the drum and is secured at D.
Determine the initial acceleration a of the vehicle.
The wheels roll without slipping.

Problems

485

T
C
150 mm

B

A

400
mm

25
100

Problem 6/164

D

486

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

SECTION C IMPULSE AND MOMENTUM
6/8

Impulse-Momentum Equations

The principles of impulse and momentum were developed and used
in Articles 3/9 and 3/10 for the description of particle motion. In that
treatment, we observed that those principles were of particular importance when the applied forces were expressible as functions of the time
and when interactions between particles occurred during short periods
of time, such as with impact. Similar advantages result when the impulse-momentum principles are applied to the motion of rigid bodies.
In Art. 4/2 the impulse-momentum principles were extended to
cover any deﬁned system of mass particles without restriction as to the
connections between the particles of the system. These extended relations all apply to the motion of a rigid body, which is merely a special
case of a general system of mass. We will now apply these equations directly to rigid-body motion in two dimensions.

Linear Momentum
In Art. 4/4 we deﬁned the linear momentum of a mass system as the
vector sum of the linear momenta of all its particles and wrote G ϭ
r
Σmivi. With ri representing the position vector to mi, we have vi ϭ ˙i
and G ϭ Σmi˙i which, for a system whose total mass is constant, may be
r
written as G ϭ d(Σmiri)/dt. When we substitute the principle of moments mr ϭ Σmiri to locate the mass center, the momentum becomes
˙
G ϭ d(mr)/dt ϭ mr , where ˙ is the velocity v of the mass center. Therer
fore, as before, we ﬁnd that the linear momentum of any mass system,
rigid or nonrigid, is
G ϭ mv
·
ρi = ω × ρi
mi

ρi

·
vi = ri

–
v
·
– r
G v=–

ri
–
r

ω

In the derivation of Eq. 4/5, we note that it was unnecessary to
employ the kinematic condition for a rigid body, Fig. 6/13, which is
vi ϭ v ϩ ␻ ؋ ␳i. In that case, we obtain the same result by writing G ϭ
Σmi(v ϩ ␻ ؋ ␳i). The first sum is vΣmi ϭ mv, and the second sum becomes ␻ ؋ Σmi␳i ϭ ␻ ؋ m␳ ϭ 0 since ␳i is measured from the mass
center, making ␳ zero.
Next in Art. 4/4 we rewrote Newton’s generalized second law as Eq.
4/6. This equation and its integrated form are

˙
ΣF ϭ G

and

G1 ϩ

O

Figure 6/13

[4/5]

͵

t2

t1

ΣF dt ϭ G2

(6/12)

Equation 6/12 may be written in its scalar-component form, which, for
plane motion in the x-y plane, gives

˙
ΣFx ϭ Gx
˙
ΣFy ϭ Gy

͵

t2

(Gx)1 ϩ
(Gy)1 ϩ

͵

t2

and

t1

t1

ΣFx dt ϭ (Gx)2
(6/12a)
ΣFy dt ϭ (Gy)2

Article 6/8

Impulse-Momentum Equations

487

In words, the ﬁrst of Eqs. 6/12 and 6/12a states that the resultant force
equals the time rate of change of momentum. The integrated form of
Eqs. 6/12 and 6/12a states that the initial linear momentum plus the linear impulse acting on the body equals the ﬁnal linear momentum.
As in the force-mass-acceleration formulation, the force summations in Eqs. 6/12 and 6/12a must include all forces acting externally on
the body considered. We emphasize again, therefore, that in the use of
the impulse-momentum equations, it is essential to construct the complete impulse-momentum diagrams so as to disclose all external impulses. In contrast to the method of work and energy, all forces exert
impulses, whether they do work or not.

HG ϭ I␻

(6/13)

This angular momentum appears in the moment-angular-momentum
relation, Eq. 4/9, which in scalar notation for plane motion, along with
its integrated form, is

˙
ΣMG ϭ HG

and

(HG)1 ϩ

fstockfoto/shutterstock.com

Angular Momentum
Angular momentum is deﬁned as the moment of linear momentum.
In Art. 4/4 we expressed the angular momentum about the mass center
of any prescribed system of mass as HG ϭ Σ␳i ؋ mivi, which is merely
the vector sum of the moments about G of the linear momenta of all
particles. We showed in Art. 4/4 that this vector sum could also be written as HG ϭ Σ␳i ؋ mi ␳ i, where ␳ i is the velocity of mi with respect to G.
˙
˙
Although we have simpliﬁed this expression in Art. 6/2 in the course
of deriving the moment equation of motion, we will pursue this same expression again for sake of emphasis by using the rigid body in plane motion represented in Fig. 6/13. The relative velocity becomes ␳ i ϭ ␻ ؋ ␳i,
˙
where the angular velocity of the body is ␻ ϭ ␻k. The unit vector k is directed into the paper for the sense of ␻ shown. Because ␳i, ␳ i, and ␻ are
˙
at right angles to one another, the magnitude of ␳ i is ␳i␻, and the mag˙
nitude of ␳i ؋ mi ␳ i is ␳i2␻mi. Thus, we may write HG ϭ Σ␳i2mi␻k ϭ I␻k,
˙
where I ϭ Σmi␳i2 is the mass moment of inertia of the body about its
mass center.
Because the angular-momentum vector is always normal to the
plane of motion, vector notation is generally unnecessary, and we may
write the angular momentum about the mass center as the scalar

͵

t2

t1

ΣMG dt ϭ (HG)2

(6/14)

In words, the ﬁrst of Eqs. 6/14 states that the sum of the moments
about the mass center of all forces acting on the body equals the time
rate of change of angular momentum about the mass center. The integrated form of Eq. 6/14 states that the initial angular momentum about
the mass center G plus the external angular impulse about G equals the
ﬁnal angular momentum about G.
The sense for positive rotation must be clearly established, and
the algebraic signs of ΣMG, (HG)1, and (HG)2 must be consistent with

This ice skater can effect a large increase in angular speed about a vertical axis by drawing her arms closer
to the center of her body.

488

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

ω
_
HG = Iω
_
G = mv

_
v

G

this choice. The impulse-momentum diagram (see Art. 3/9) is again
essential. See the Sample Problems which accompany this article for
examples of these diagrams.
With the moments about G of the linear momenta of all particles accounted for by HG ϭ I␻, it follows that we may represent the linear momentum G ϭ mv as a vector through the mass center G, as shown in
Fig. 6/14a. Thus, G and HG have vector properties analogous to those of
the resultant force and couple.
With the establishment of the linear- and angular-momentum resultants in Fig. 6/14a, which represents the momentum diagram, the
angular momentum HO about any point O is easily written as
HO ϭ I␻ ϩ mvd

d

O

This expression holds at any particular instant of time about O, which
may be a ﬁxed or moving point on or off the body.
When a body rotates about a ﬁxed point O on the body or body extended, as shown in Fig. 6/14b, the relations v ϭ r␻ and d ϭ r may be
substituted into the expression for HO, giving HO ϭ (I␻ ϩ mr 2␻). But
I ϩ mr 2 ϭ IO so that

(a)

ω
_
HG = Iω
_
G = mv
G _
r
O

(b)

Figure 6/14

(6/15)

HO ϭ IO␻

_
v

(6/16)

In Art. 4/2 we derived Eq. 4/7, which is the moment-angularmomentum equation about a ﬁxed point O. This equation, written in
scalar notation for plane motion along with its integrated form, is

˙
ΣMO ϭ HO

and

(HO)1 ϩ

͵

t2

t1

ΣMO dt ϭ (HO)2

(6/17)

Note that you should not add linear momentum and angular momentum
for the same reason that force and moment cannot be added directly.

Interconnected Rigid Bodies
The equations of impulse and momentum may also be used for a
system of interconnected rigid bodies since the momentum principles
are applicable to any general system of constant mass. Figure 6/15
shows the combined free-body diagram and momentum diagram for two
˙
interconnected bodies a and b. Equations 4/6 and 4/7, which are ΣF ϭ G
˙ O where O is a ﬁxed reference point, may be written for
and ΣMO ϭ H
each member of the system and added. The sums are

˙
˙
ΣF ϭ Ga ϩ Gb ϩ …
˙
˙
ΣMO ϭ (HO)aϩ (HO)b ϩ …

(6/18)

In integrated form for a ﬁnite time interval, these expressions become

͵

t2

t1

ΣF dt ϭ (⌬G)system

͵

t2

t1

ΣMO dt ϭ (⌬HO)system

(6/19)

Article 6/8

F1

_
Ga = mava

_
Gb = mbvb

F5

F6

a

b

Ga
F2

Gb

_
(HG)a = Ia ωa

_
(HG)b = Ib ω b

F4

F3
O

Figure 6/15

We note that the equal and opposite actions and reactions in the connections are internal to the system and cancel one another so they are not
involved in the force and moment summations. Also, point O is one ﬁxed
reference point for the entire system.

Conservation of Momentum
In Art. 4/5, we expressed the principles of conservation of momentum for a general mass system by Eqs. 4/15 and 4/16. These principles
are applicable to either a single rigid body or a system of interconnected
rigid bodies. Thus, if ΣF ϭ 0 for a given interval of time, then
G1 ϭ G2

[4/15]

which says that the linear-momentum vector undergoes no change in the
absence of a resultant linear impulse. For the system of interconnected
rigid bodies, there may be linear-momentum changes of individual parts of
the system during the interval, but there will be no resultant momentum
change for the system as a whole if there is no resultant linear impulse.
Similarly, if the resultant moment about a given ﬁxed point O or
about the mass center is zero during a particular interval of time for a
single rigid body or for a system of interconnected rigid bodies, then
(HO)1 ϭ (HO)2

or

(HG)1 ϭ (HG)2

[4/16]

which says that the angular momentum either about the ﬁxed point or
about the mass center undergoes no change in the absence of a corresponding resultant angular impulse. Again, in the case of the interconnected system, there may be angular-momentum changes of individual
components during the interval, but there will be no resultant angularmomentum change for the system as a whole if there is no resultant angular impulse about the ﬁxed point or the mass center. Either of Eqs.
4/16 may hold without the other.
In the case of an interconnected system, the system center of mass
is generally inconvenient to use.
As was illustrated previously in Articles 3/9 and 3/10 in the chapter
on particle motion, the use of momentum principles greatly facilitates

Impulse-Momentum Equations

489

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

the analysis of situations where forces and couples act for very short periods of time.

Impact of Rigid Bodies
Impact phenomena involve a fairly complex interrelationship of energy and momentum transfer, energy dissipation, elastic and plastic deformation, relative impact velocity, and body geometry. In Art. 3/12 we
treated the impact of bodies modeled as particles and considered only
the case of central impact, where the contact forces of impact passed
through the mass centers of the bodies, as would always happen with
colliding smooth spheres, for example. To relate the conditions after impact to those before impact required the introduction of the so-called coefﬁcient of restitution e or impact coefﬁcient, which compares the
relative separation velocity with the relative approach velocity measured along the direction of the contact forces. Although in the classical
theory of impact, e was considered a constant for given materials, more
modern investigations show that e is highly dependent on geometry and
impact velocity as well as on materials. At best, even for spheres and
rods under direct central and longitudinal impact, the coefﬁcient of
restitution is a complex and variable factor of limited use.
Any attempt to extend this simpliﬁed theory of impact utilizing a
coefﬁcient of restitution for the noncentral impact of rigid bodies of
varying shape is a gross oversimpliﬁcation which has little practical
value. For this reason, we do not include such an exercise in this book,
even though such a theory is easily developed and appears in certain references. We can and do, however, make full use of the principles of conservation of linear and angular momentum when they are applicable in
discussing impact and other interactions of rigid bodies.

NASA, 2002

490

There are small reaction wheels inside the Hubble Space Telescope that
make precision attitude control possible. The principles of angular momentum are fundamental to the design and operation of such a control system.

Article 6/8

Impulse-Momentum Equations

491

SAMPLE PROBLEM 6/14
The force P, which is applied to the cable wrapped around the central hub of
the symmetrical wheel, is increased slowly according to P ϭ 1.5t, where P is in
pounds and t is the time in seconds after P is ﬁrst applied. Determine the angular
velocity ␻2 of the wheel 10 seconds after P is applied if the wheel is rolling to the
left with a velocity of its center of 3 ft/sec at time t ϭ 0. The wheel weighs 120 lb
with a radius of gyration about its center of 10 in. and rolls without slipping.

_
v1 = 3 ft/sec

9″

18″
G

P

Solution.

The impulse-momentum diagram of the wheel discloses the initial
linear and angular momenta at time t1 ϭ 0, all external impulses, and the ﬁnal
linear and angular momenta at time t2 ϭ 10 sec. The correct direction of the fricᕡ tion force F is that to oppose the slipping which would occur without friction.
mg dt

_
Iω 1
y

18″

+
x

_
mv1

_
Iω 2

9″

+

G

=

G
O

P dt

C
F dt

t1 = 0

t2 = 10 sec

N dt

Application of the linear impulse-momentum equation and the angular
impulse-momentum equation over the entire interval gives

ᕢ
ᕣ

120
120
΄(G ) ϩ ͵ ΣF dt ϭ (G ) ΅ 32.2 (Ϫ3) ϩ ͵ (1.5t Ϫ F) dt ϭ 32.2 ΄18 ␻ ΅
12
΄(H ) ϩ ͵ ΣM dt ϭ (H ) ΅
9
3
18
120 10
120 10
(1.5t)΅ dt ϭ
Ϫ
ϩ͵ ΄ FϪ
␻
12
12
32.2 ΂12΃ ΂ 18/12΃
32.2 ΂12΃ ΄ ΅
x 1

t1

x 2

x

ance of moments about C, which
causes a clockwise angular acceleration as the wheel rolls without slipping. Since the moment sum about
G must also be in the clockwise
sense of ␣, the friction force must
act to the left to provide it.

2

0

t2

G 1

t1

G 2

G

10

2

2

2

0

Since the force F is variable, it must remain under the integral sign. We
eliminate F between the two equations by multiplying the second one by 12 and
18
adding to the ﬁrst one. Integrating and solving for ␻2 give
␻2 ϭ 3.13 rad/sec clockwise

Ans.

Alternative Solution. We could avoid the necessity of a simultaneous solution by
applying the second of Eqs. 6/17 about a ﬁxed point O on the horizontal surface. The
moments of the 120-lb weight and the equal and opposite force N cancel one another, and F is eliminated since its moment about O is zero. Thus, the angular momentum about O becomes HO ϭ I␻ ϩ mvr ϭ mk2␻ ϩ mr2␻ ϭ m(k2 ϩ r2)␻, where
k is the centroidal radius of gyration and r is the 18-in. rolling radius. Thus, we see
that HO ϭ HC since k2 ϩ r2 ϭ kC2 and HC ϭ IC ␻ ϭ mkC2␻. Equation 6/17 now gives

΄(H ) ϩ ͵
O 1

120
32.2

t2

t1

΅

ΣMO dt ϭ (HO)2

3
΄΂10΃ ϩ ΂18΃ ΅΄Ϫ 18/12΅ ϩ ͵
12
12
2

2

10

0

Ϫ
΂1812 9΃ dt

1.5t

ϭ

120
32.2

΄΂10΃ ϩ ΂18΃ ΅΄␻ ΅
12
12
2

Helpful Hints

ᕡ Also, we note the clockwise imbal-

10

t2

_
mv 2

G

2

2

Solution of this one equation is equivalent to the simultaneous solution of the
two previous equations.

ᕢ Note carefully the signs of the momentum terms. The ﬁnal linear velocity is assumed in the positive
x-direction, so (Gx)2 is positive. The
initial linear velocity is negative, so
(Gx)1 is negative.

ᕣ Since the wheel rolls without slipping, a positive x-velocity requires a
clockwise angular velocity, and vice
versa.

492

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

SAMPLE PROBLEM 6/15

A

The sheave E of the hoisting rig shown has a mass of 30 kg and a centroidal
radius of gyration of 250 mm. The 40-kg load D which is carried by the sheave
has an initial downward velocity v1 ϭ 1.2 m/s at the instant when a clockwise
torque is applied to the hoisting drum A to maintain essentially a constant force
F ϭ 380 N in the cable at B. Compute the angular velocity ␻2 of the sheave 5 seconds after the torque is applied to the drum and ﬁnd the tension T in the cable
at O during the interval. Neglect all friction.

O
B

E

375 mm

C
D

Solution. The load and the sheave taken together constitute the system, and
its impulse-momentum diagram is shown. The tension T in the cable at O and the
ﬁnal angular velocity ␻2 of the sheave are the two unknowns. We eliminate T initially by applying the moment-angular-momentum equation about the ﬁxed point
O, taking counterclockwise as positive.

΄(H ) ϩ ͵
O 1

͵

t2

t1

t2

t1

ΣMO dt ϭ

΅

v1 = 1.2 m/s

ΣMO dt ϭ (HO)2

͵

O
_
Iω 1

5

0

F dt

_
Iω 2

T dt

mtot v2

[380(0.750) Ϫ (30 ϩ 40)(9.81)(0.375)] dt
375 mm

ϭ 137.4 N ⅐ m ⅐ s

C

C

C

(HO)1 ϭ Ϫ(mE ϩ mD)v1d Ϫ I␻1
ϭ Ϫ(30 ϩ 40)(1.2)(0.375) Ϫ 30(0.250)2

ᕡ

+

1.2
΂0.375΃

=

ϭ Ϫ37.5 N ⅐ m ⅐ s
mtotv1

(HO)2 ϭ (mE ϩmD)v2d ϩ I␻2

mtot g dt

ϭ ϩ(30 ϩ 40)(0.375␻2)(0.375) ϩ 30(0.250)2␻2

Helpful Hint

ϭ 11.72␻2

ᕡ The units of angular momentum,
which are those of angular impulse,
may also be written as kg ⅐ m2/s.

Substituting into the momentum equation gives
Ϫ37.5 ϩ 137.4 ϭ 11.72␻2
␻2 ϭ 8.53 rad/s counterclockwise

Ans.

The linear-impulse-momentum equation is now applied to the system to determine T. With the positive direction up, we have

΄G ϩ ͵
1

t2

t1

΅

ΣF dt ϭ G2

70(Ϫ1.2) ϩ

͵

5

0

[T ϩ 380 Ϫ 70(9.81)] dt ϭ 70[0.375(8.53)]
5T ϭ 1841

T ϭ 368 N

Ans.

If we had taken our moment equation around the center C of the sheave instead of point O, it would contain both unknowns T and ␻, and we would be
obliged to solve it simultaneously with the foregoing force equation, which would
also contain the same two unknowns.

Article 6/8

Impulse-Momentum Equations

SAMPLE PROBLEM 6/16

493

A

The uniform rectangular block of dimensions shown is sliding to the left on
the horizontal surface with a velocity v1 when it strikes the small step at O. Assume negligible rebound at the step and compute the minimum value of v1 which
will permit the block to pivot freely about O and just reach the standing position
A with no velocity. Compute the percentage energy loss n for b ϭ c.

c

v1
b

O

Solution.

We break the overall process into two subevents: the collision (I)
and the subsequent rotation (II).
mv2

mg dt
mv1
G

+

b

=

G

IOω 2

_
r

G

O
c

O

O

Ox dt
Oy dt

I. Collision.

With the assumption that the weight mg is nonimpulsive, angu-

ᕡ lar momentum about O is conserved. The initial angular momentum of the block

about O just before impact is the moment about O of its linear momentum and is
ᕢ (HO)1 ϭ mv1(b/2). The angular momentum about O just after impact when the
block is starting its rotation about O is

ᕣ [HO ϭ IO␻]
m 2
(b ϩ c2)␻2
3

ϭ

Conservation of angular momentum gives
b m
mv1 ϭ (b2 ϩ c2)␻2
2
3

[(HO)1 ϭ (HO)2]

␻2 ϭ

Helpful Hints

ᕡ If the corner of the block struck a
spring instead of the rigid step, then
the time of the interaction during
compression of the spring could become appreciable, and the angular
impulse about the ﬁxed point at the
end of the spring due to the moment
of the weight would have to be accounted for.

ᕢ Notice the abrupt change in direc-

3v1b

tion and magnitude of the velocity of
G during the impact.

2(b2 ϩ c2)

II. Rotation about O.

With the assumptions that the rotation is like that
about a ﬁxed frictionless pivot and that the location of the effective pivot O is at
ground level, mechanical energy is conserved during the rotation according to

ᕣ Be sure to use the transfer theorem
IO ϭ I ϩ mr 2 correctly here.

ᕤ The datum is taken at the initial al-

ᕤ

titude of the mass center G. State 3
is taken to be the standing position
A, at which the diagonal of the block
is vertical.
Ans.

The percentage loss of energy during the impact is
nϭ

1
1
2
2
kO2␻22
͉⌬E ͉ 2 mv1 Ϫ 2 IO␻2
b2 ϩ c2
ϭ1Ϫ
ϭ1Ϫ
ϭ
2
1
3
E
v1
mv 2
2

ϭ1Ϫ

΂

1

3

΂

c2
4 1ϩ 2
b

΃

2

΃΄2(b 3b c )΅
ϩ

n ϭ 62.5% for b ϭ c

2

2

Ans.

494

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

PROBLEMS
Introductory Problems
6/165 The mass center G of the slender bar of mass 0.8 kg
and length 0.4 m is falling vertically with a velocity
v ϭ 2 m/s at the instant depicted. Calculate the angular momentum HO of the bar about point O if the
angular velocity of the bar is (a) ␻a ϭ 10 rad/s
clockwise and (b) ␻b ϭ 10 rad/s counterclockwise.

6/167 The 75-kg ﬂywheel has a radius of gyration about
its shaft axis of k ϭ 0.50 m and is subjected to the
torque M ϭ 10(1 Ϫ eϪt) N ⅐ m, where t is in seconds.
If the ﬂywheel is at rest at time t ϭ 0, determine its
angular velocity ␻ at t ϭ 3 s.

M

0.4 m
G

Problem 6/167
θ

ωa

v
ωb

O

0.3 m

6/168 The constant tensions of 200 N and 160 N are applied to the hoisting cable as shown. If the velocity
v of the load is 2 m/s down and the angular velocity
␻ of the pulley is 8 rad/s counterclockwise at time
t ϭ 0, determine v and ␻ after the cable tensions
have been applied for 5 s. Note the independence of
the results.
200 N

Problem 6/165

6/166 The grooved drums in the two systems shown are
identical. In both cases, (a) and (b), the system is at
rest at time t ϭ 0. Determine the angular velocity
of each grooved drum at time t ϭ 4 s. Neglect friction at the pivot O.

160 N
300 mm

15 kg
k = 250 mm

_
m = 14 kg, k = 225 mm
ro = 325 mm, ri = 215 mm
20 kg

O

ro
ri

m

10(9.81) N
(a)

ro
ri

10 kg
(b)

Problem 6/166

m

Problem 6/168

Article 6/8
6/169 Determine the angular momentum of the earth
about the center of the sun. Assume a homogeneous earth and a circular earth orbit of radius
149.6(106) km; consult Table D/2 for other needed
information. Comment on the relative contributions of the terms I␻ and mv d.

Problems

495

6/172 The man is walking with speed v1 ϭ 1.2 m/s to the
right when he trips over a small ﬂoor discontinuity.
Estimate his angular velocity ␻ just after the impact. His mass is 76 kg with center-of-mass height
h ϭ 0.87 m, and his mass moment of inertia about
the ankle joint O is 66 kg ⅐ m2, where all are properties of the portion of his body above O; i.e., both the
mass and moment of inertia do not include the foot.

Sunlight

ω

G

v1

N
h

y
x

z

O
Problem 6/172

Problem 6/169

6/170 The constant 9-lb force is applied to the 80-lb
stepped cylinder as shown. The centroidal radius of
gyration of the cylinder is k ϭ 8 in., and it rolls on
the incline without slipping. If the cylinder is at rest
when the force is ﬁrst applied, determine its angular velocity ␻ eight seconds later.
9 lb
6″

6/173 Repeat the previous problem, only now the man
carries a 10-kg backpack as shown. Develop a general expression for the angular velocity of the man
just after impact with the small step. Evaluate your
expression for the backpack center-of-mass positions
(a) d ϭ 0.2 m and hB ϭ 0.3 m and (b) d ϭ hB ϭ 0.
Case (b) is the condition of a beltpack. The mass
conditions for the man remain unchanged from the
previous problem. State any assumptions and compare your results with those from the previous
problem.

10″
d
10°

Problem 6/170

6/171 The frictional moment Mƒ acting on a rotating turbine disk and its shaft is given by Mƒ ϭ k␻2 where
␻ is the angular velocity of the turbine. If the
source of power is cut off while the turbine is running with an angular velocity ␻0, determine the
time t for the speed of the turbine to drop to half of
its initial value. The moment of inertia of the turbine disk and shaft is I.

hB

G

v1
h

O

Problem 6/173

496

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

6/174 A uniform slender bar of mass M and length L is
translating on the smooth horizontal x-y plane with
a velocity vM when a particle of mass m traveling
with a velocity vm as shown strikes and becomes
embedded in the bar. Determine the ﬁnal linear
and angular velocities of the bar with its embedded
particle.
3L
—
4
M

y

6/177 The wad of clay of mass m is initially moving with a
horizontal velocity v1 when it strikes and sticks to
the initially stationary uniform slender bar of mass
M and length L. Determine the ﬁnal angular velocity of the combined body and the x-component of
the linear impulse applied to the body by the pivot
O during the impact.
M

L
—
4

L
––
3

m

vM

m

x

6/175 The initially stationary uniform disk of mass m1
and radius b is allowed to drop onto the moving
belt from a very small elevation. Determine the
time t required for the disk to acquire its steadystate angular speed. The belt drive pulley rotates
with a constant counterclockwise velocity ␻.
3b
m1

Problem 6/177

Representative Problems
6/178 The uniform rectangular panel is falling vertically
with speed v1 when its small peg A engages in the
receptacle. Determine the angular velocity of the
body as well as the x- and y-components of its masscenter velocity just after the impact.

b
O

μk

v1

L
––
3

Problem 6/174

x

O

L
––
3

vm

y

m2

A

G

ω

b
–
–
2

r

A
Problem 6/175

6/176 Repeat the previous problem if the belt drive pulley
rotates clockwise with a constant angular velocity ␻.

b
–
–
8

v1
7b
––
–
8

Problem 6/178

y
x

Article 6/8

Problems

497

ω0

6/179 Just after leaving the platform, the diver’s fully extended 80-kg body has a rotational speed of 0.3 rev/s
about an axis normal to the plane of the trajectory.
Estimate the angular velocity N later in the dive
when the diver has assumed the tuck position.
Make reasonable assumptions concerning the mass
moment of inertia of the body in each conﬁguration.

400 mm
v0

N

2m

0.3 rev/s
0.7 m
Problem 6/181

Problem 6/179

6/180 The slender rod of mass m1 and length L has a
movable slider of mass m2 which can be tightened
at any location x along the rod. The assembly is
initially falling in translation with speed v1. A small
peg on the left end of the rod becomes engaged in
the receptacle. Determine the angular velocity ␻2
of the body just after impact. For the condition
m2 ϭ m1 /2, determine the maximum value of ␻2
and the corresponding value of x. Plot ␻2 versus x/L
for this mass condition.

6/182 Two small variable-thrust jets are actuated to keep
the spacecraft angular velocity about the z-axis constant at ␻0 ϭ 1.25 rad/s as the two telescoping
booms are extended from r1 ϭ 1.2 m to r2 ϭ 4.5 m
at a constant rate over a 2-min period. Determine
the necessary thrust T for each jet as a function of
time where t ϭ 0 is the time when the telescoping
action is begun. The small 10-kg experiment modules at the ends of the booms may be treated as particles, and the mass of the rigid booms is negligible.
z
ω0

10 kg
G

T

1.1 m

x
m1

A

T

1.1 m

m2
v1
Problem 6/180

6/181 A cylindrical shell of 400-mm diameter and mass m
is rotating about its central horizontal axis with an
angular velocity ␻0 ϭ 30 rad/s when it is released
onto a horizontal surface with no velocity of its center (v0 ϭ 0). If slipping between the shell and the
surface occurs for 1.5 s, calculate the coefﬁcient of
kinetic friction ␮k and the maximum velocity v
reached by the center of the shell.

r
r

Problem 6/182

10 kg

498

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

6/183 With the gears initially at rest and the couple M
equal to zero, the forces exerted by the frame on the
shafts of the gears at A and B are 30 and 16 lb, respectively, both upward to support the weights of
the two gears. A couple M ϭ 60 lb-in. is now applied to the larger gear through its shaft at A. After
4 sec the larger gear has a clockwise angular momentum of 12 ft-lb-sec, and the smaller gear has a
counterclockwise angular momentum of 4 ft-lb-sec.
Calculate the new values of the forces RA and RB exerted by the frame on the shafts during the 4-sec interval. Isolate the two gears together as the system.

6/185 The base B has a mass of 5 kg and a radius of
gyration of 80 mm about the central vertical axis
shown. Each plate P has a mass of 3 kg. If the system is freely rotating about the vertical axis with
an angular speed N1 ϭ 10 rev/min with the plates
in the vertical position, estimate the angular speed
N2 when the plates have moved to the horizontal
positions indicated. Neglect friction.
120
mm 120
mm

100
mm

100
mm
300 mm
16″

A

B

P

10″

P

M

B
Problem 6/183
N

6/184 The phenomenon of vehicle “tripping” is investigated here. The sport-utility vehicle is sliding sideways with speed v1 and no angular velocity when it
strikes a small curb. Assume no rebound of the
right-side tires and estimate the minimum speed v1
which will cause the vehicle to roll completely over
to its right side. The mass of the SUV is 2300 kg
and its mass moment of inertia about a longitudinal axis through the mass center G is 900 kg ⅐ m2.

v1
G

760 mm

880 mm

880 mm

Problem 6/184

Problem 6/185

6/186 In the initial position shown, the disk of axial mass
moment of inertia Id rotates freely with angular
velocity ␻ relative to the lightweight frame. The
turntable of axial mass moment of inertia It rotates
freely with angular velocity ⍀1. Then the axis of
the disk is turned through an angular displacement
␪ ϭ 90Њ. What is the resulting angular velocity ⍀2
of the turntable? Assume that the thickness of the
disk is sufﬁciently small so that its axial moment of
inertia can be approximated by twice its transverse
moment of inertia.

Article 6/8

Problems

499

6/188 The homogeneous sphere of mass m and radius r is
projected along the incline of angle ␪ with an initial
speed v0 and no angular velocity (␻0 ϭ 0). If the coefﬁcient of kinetic friction is ␮k, determine the time
duration t of the period of slipping. In addition,
state the velocity v of the mass center G and the angular velocity ␻ at the end of the period of slipping.

ω

θ

ω0

Ω

G

μk

m
v0

r
θ

Problem 6/188
Problem 6/186

6/187 The system is initially rotating freely with angular
velocity ␻1 ϭ 10 rad/s when the inner rod A is centered lengthwise within the hollow cylinder B as
shown in the ﬁgure. Determine the angular
velocity of the system (a) if the inner rod A has
moved so that a length b/2 is protruding from the
cylinder, (b) just before the rod leaves the cylinder,
and (c) just after the rod leaves the cylinder. Neglect the moment of inertia of the vertical support
shafts and friction in the two bearings. Both bodies
are constructed of the same uniform material. Use
the values b ϭ 400 mm and r ϭ 20 mm, and refer
to the results of Prob. B/37 as needed.

b
–
–
4

b
–
–
4

b
–
–
4

b
–
–
4

6/189 The homogeneous sphere of Prob. 6/188 is placed
on the incline with a clockwise angular velocity ␻0
but no linear velocity of its center (v0 ϭ 0). Determine the time duration t of the period of slipping.
In addition, state the velocity v and angular velocity ␻ at the end of the period of slipping.
6/190 The 165-lb ice skater with arms extended horizontally spins about a vertical axis with a rotational
speed of 1 rev/sec. Estimate his rotational speed N if
he fully retracts his arms, bringing his hands very
close to the centerline of his body. As a reasonable
approximation, model the extended arms as uniform slender rods, each of which is 27 in. long and
weighs 15 lb. Model the torso as a solid 135-lb cylinder 13 in. in diameter. Treat the man with arms retracted as a solid 165-lb cylinder of 13-in. diameter.
Neglect friction at the skate–ice interface.
1 rev/sec

13′′

2r

27′′

A
r
B
ω

Problem 6/187
Problem 6/190

500

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

6/191 The elements of a spacecraft with axial mass symmetry and a reaction-wheel control system are
shown in the ﬁgure. When the motor exerts a torque
on the reaction wheel, an equal and opposite torque
is exerted on the spacecraft, thereby changing its
angular momentum in the z-direction. If all system
elements start from rest and the motor exerts a constant torque M for a time period t, determine the
ﬁnal angular velocity of (a) the spacecraft and (b) the
wheel relative to the spacecraft. The mass moment
of inertia about the z-axis of the entire spacecraft,
including the wheel, is I and that of the wheel alone
is Iw. The spin axis of the wheel is coincident with
the z-axis of symmetry of the spacecraft.
z

ω

6′
2′

θ

2′

6′
2′

x

8′

2′

y

8′

Problem 6/192

I

Reaction
wheel
Iw

z

M
Motor

Problem 6/191

6/193 A 55-kg dynamics instructor is demonstrating the
principles of angular momentum to her class. She
stands on a freely rotating platform with her body
aligned with the vertical platform axis. With the
platform not rotating, she holds a modiﬁed bicycle
wheel so that its axis is vertical. She then turns
the wheel axis to a horizontal orientation without
changing the 600-mm distance from the centerline
of her body to the wheel center, and her students
observe a platform rotation rate of 30 rev/min. If
the rim-weighted wheel has a mass of 10 kg and a
centroidal radius of gyration k ϭ 300 mm, and is
spinning at a fairly constant rate of 250 rev/min,
estimate the mass moment of inertia I of the instructor (in the posture shown) about the vertical
platform axis.
600
mm

6/192 The body of the spacecraft weighs 322 lb on earth
and has a radius of gyration about its z-axis of 1.5 ft.
Each of the two solar panels may be treated as a
uniform ﬂat plate weighing 16.1 lb. If the spacecraft
is rotating about its z-axis at the angular rate of
1.0 rad/sec with ␪ ϭ 0, determine the angular rate
␻ after the panels are rotated to the position
␪ ϭ ␲/2 by an internal mechanism. Neglect the small
momentum change of the body about the y-axis.

Ω

Problem 6/193

Article 6/8
6/194 If the dynamics instructor of Prob. 6/193 reorients
the wheel axis by 180Њ with respect to its initial vertical position, what rotational speed N will her students observe? All the given information and the
result I ϭ 3.45 kg ⅐ m2 of Prob. 6/193 may be utilized.
6/195 The slotted circular disk whose mass is 6 kg has a
radius of gyration about O of 175 mm. The disk carries the four steel balls, each of mass 0.15 kg and located as shown, and rotates freely about a vertical
axis through O with an angular speed of 120
rev/min. Each of the small balls is held in place by a
latching device not shown. If the balls are released
while the disk is rotating and come to rest relative to
the disk at the outer ends of the slots, compute the
new angular velocity ␻ of the disk. Also ﬁnd the
magnitude ͉⌬E ͉ of the energy loss due to the impact
of the balls with the ends of the slots. Neglect the diameter of the balls and discuss this approximation.

Problems

501

6/197 The 17.5-Mg lunar landing module with center of
mass at G has a radius of gyration of 1.8 m about
G. The module is designed to contact the lunar surface with a vertical free-fall velocity of 8 km/h. If
one of the four legs hits the lunar surface on a
small incline and suffers no rebound, compute the
angular velocity ␻ of the module immediately after
impact as it pivots about the contact point. The 9-m
dimension is the distance across the diagonal of the
square formed by the four feet as corners.
8 km/h

G

3m

120 rev/min
9m

m

O

0
10
20

0

m

Problem 6/197

m

m

Problem 6/195

6/196 A uniform pole of length L, inclined at an angle ␪
with the vertical, is dropped and both ends have a
velocity v as end A hits the ground. If end A pivots
about its contact point during the remainder of the
motion, determine the velocity vЈ with which end B
hits the ground.
B

6/198 A uniform circular disk which rolls with a velocity v
without slipping encounters an abrupt change in
the direction of its motion as it rolls onto the
incline ␪. Determine the new velocity vЈ of the center
of the disk as it starts up the incline, and ﬁnd the
fraction n of the initial energy which is lost because
of impact with the incline if ␪ ϭ 10Њ.

G

v

r
θ

v
Problem 6/198

L
θ

v A

v′

Problem 6/196

502

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

6/199 Determine the minimum velocity v which the wheel
must have to just roll over the obstruction. The
centroidal radius of gyration of the wheel is k, and
it is assumed that the wheel does not slip.

v
r

h

6/200 A frozen-juice can rests on the horizontal rack of a
freezer door as shown. With what maximum angular velocity ⍀ can the door be “slammed” shut
against its seal and not dislodge the can? Assume
that the can rolls without slipping on the corner of
the rack, and neglect the dimension d compared
with the 500-mm distance.
Ω
500 mm
d

Problem 6/199

35 mm

7 mm
Problem 6/200

Article 6/9

6/9

Chapter Review

In Chapter 6 we have made use of essentially all the elements of dynamics studied so far. We noted that a knowledge of kinematics, using
both absolute- and relative-motion analysis, is an essential part of the solution to problems in rigid-body kinetics. Our approach in Chapter 6 paralleled Chapter 3, where we developed the kinetics of particles using
force-mass-acceleration, work-energy, and impulse-momentum methods.
The following is a summary of the important considerations in the
solution of rigid-body kinetics problems in plane motion:
1. Identiﬁcation of the body or system. It is essential to make an
unambiguous decision as to which body or system of bodies is to be
analyzed and then isolate the selected body or system by drawing
the free-body and kinetic diagrams, the active-force diagram, or the
impulse-momentum diagram, whichever is appropriate.
2. Type of motion. Next identify the category of motion as rectilinear translation, curvilinear translation, ﬁxed-axis rotation, or general plane motion. Always make sure that the kinematics of the
problem is properly described before attempting to solve the kinetic
equations.
3. Coordinate system. Choose an appropriate coordinate system.
The geometry of the particular motion involved is usually the deciding factor. Designate the positive sense for moment and force summations and be consistent with the choice.
4. Principle and method. If the instantaneous relationship between
the applied forces and the acceleration is desired, then the equivalence between the forces and their ma and I␣ resultants, as disclosed by the free-body and kinetic diagrams, will indicate the most
direct approach to a solution.
When motion occurs over an interval of displacement, the workenergy approach is indicated, and we relate initial to ﬁnal velocities
without calculating the acceleration. We have seen the advantage of
this approach for interconnected mechanical systems with negligible internal friction.
If the interval of motion is speciﬁed in terms of time rather
than displacement, the impulse-momentum approach is indicated.
When the angular motion of a rigid body is suddenly changed, the
principle of conservation of angular momentum may apply.
5. Assumptions and approximations. By now you should have acquired a feel for the practical signiﬁcance of certain assumptions
and approximations, such as treating a rod as an ideal slender bar
and neglecting friction when it is minimal. These and other idealizations are important to the process of obtaining solutions to real
problems.

Chapter Review

503

504

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

REVIEW PROBLEMS
6/201 The force P is applied to the homogeneous crate of
mass m. If the coefﬁcient of kinetic friction between
the crate and the horizontal platform is ␮k, determine the limiting values of h so that the crate will
slide without tipping about either the front edge or
the rear edge.

N

110
mm
B′

A
O

c

160
mm
b

B

P
h
μk

Problem 6/203

Problem 6/201

8
0.

O

m

6/202 A person who walks through the revolving door exerts a 90-N horizontal force on one of the four door
panels. If each panel is modeled by a 60-kg uniform
rectangular plate which is 1.2 m in length as viewed
from above, determine the angular acceleration of
the door unit. Neglect friction.

6/204 Each of the solid circular disk wheels has a mass of
2 kg, and the inner solid cylinder has a mass of 3 kg.
The disks and cylinder are mounted on the small
central shaft so that each can rotate independently
of the other with negligible friction in the bearings.
Calculate the acceleration of the center of the wheels
when the 20-N force is applied as shown. The coefﬁcients of friction between the wheels and the horizontal surface are ␮k ϭ 0.30 and ␮s ϭ 0.40.

20 N

0.4 m

15°
90 N

75 mm
150 mm

Problem 6/202

6/203 The preliminary design of a unit for automatically
reducing the speed of a freely rotating assembly is
shown. Initially the unit is rotating freely about a
vertical axis through O at a speed of 600 rev/min
with the arms secured in the positions shown by
AB. When the arms are released, they swing outward and become latched in the dashed positions
shown. The disk has a mass of 30 kg with a radius
of gyration of 90 mm about O. Each arm has a
length of 160 mm and a mass of 0.84 kg and may be
treated as a uniform slender rod. Determine the
new speed N of rotation and calculate the loss ͉⌬E ͉
of energy of the system. Would the results be
affected by either the direction of rotation or the
sequence of release of the rods?

20 N

Problem 6/204

Article 6/9
6/205 A slender rod of mass m0 and length l is welded at
its midpoint A to the rim of the solid circular disk
of mass m and radius r. The center of the disk,
which rolls without slipping, has a velocity v at the
instant when A is at the top of the disk with the rod
parallel to the ground. For this instant determine
the angular momentum of the combined body
about O.

Review Problems

505

6/207 The uniform rectangular block with the given dimensions is dropped from rest from the position
shown. Corner A strikes the ledge at B and becomes
latched to it. Determine the angular velocity ␻ of
the block immediately after it becomes attached to
B. Also ﬁnd the percentage n of energy loss during
the corner attachment for the case b ϭ c.
b

l
A

O

r

c

v

A
Problem 6/205
h

6/206 The uniform slender rod of mass m and length l is
freely hinged about a horizontal axis through its
end O and is given an initial angular velocity ␻0 as
it crosses the vertical position where ␪ ϭ 0. If the
rod swings through a maximum angle ␤ Ͻ 90Њ, derive an expression in integral form for the time t
from release at ␪ ϭ 0 until ␪ ϭ ␤ is reached. (Express ␻0 in terms of ␤.)

O
l

θ

β

ω =0

B

Problem 6/207

6/208 Four identical slender rods each of mass m are
welded at their ends to form a square, and the corners are then welded to a light metal hoop of radius r.
If the rigid assembly of rods and hoop is allowed to
roll down the incline, determine the minimum
value of the coefﬁcient of static friction which will
prevent slipping.

r

r
·
ω =θ
ω0

θ

Problem 6/208
Problem 6/206

506

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

6/209 A couple M ϭ 12 N ⅐ m is applied at C to the springtoggle mechanism, which is released from rest in
the position ␪ ϭ 45Њ. In this position the spring,
which has a stiffness of 140 N/m, is stretched
150 mm. Bar AB has a mass of 3 kg and BC a mass
of 6 kg. Calculate the angular velocity ␻ of BC as it
crosses the position ␪ ϭ 0. Motion is in the vertical
plane, and friction is negligible.

6/211 The small block of mass m slides along the radial
slot of the disk while the disk rotates in the horizontal plane about its center O. The block is released from rest relative to the disk and moves
outward with an increasing velocity ˙ along the
r
slot as the disk turns. Determine the expression in
terms of r and ˙ for the torque M that must be apr
plied to the disk to maintain a constant angular velocity ␻ of the disk.
ω

A
250 mm
O

r
m

B
θ

M
250 mm

250 mm
Problem 6/211
M

C

Problem 6/209

6/210 The link OA and pivoted circular disk are released
from rest in the position shown and swing in the
vertical plane about the ﬁxed bearing at O. The 6-kg
link OA has a radius of gyration about O of 375 mm.
The disk has a mass of 8 kg. The two bearings are
assumed to be frictionless. Find the force FO exerted
at O on the link (a) just after release and (b) as OA
swings through the vertical position OAЈ.

6/212 The forklift truck with center of mass at G1 has a
weight of 3200 lb including the vertical mast. The
fork and load have a combined weight of 1800 lb
with center of mass at G2. The roller guide at B
is capable of supporting horizontal force only,
whereas the connection at C, in addition to supporting horizontal force, also transmits the vertical
elevating force. If the fork is given an upward acceleration which is sufﬁcient to reduce the force under
the rear wheels at A to zero, calculate the corresponding reaction at B.
2′

250
mm

C
A
O

G
300 mm
600
mm

a

3′

G2
B

A′
G1

Problem 6/210

A
4′

4′

Problem 6/212

2′

Article 6/9
6/213 A space telescope is shown in the ﬁgure. One of the
reaction wheels of its attitude-control system is
spinning as shown at 10 rad/s, and at this speed the
friction in the wheel bearing causes an internal moment of 10Ϫ6 N ⅐ m. Both the wheel speed and the
friction moment may be considered constant over a
time span of several hours. If the mass moment of
inertia of the entire spacecraft about the x-axis is
150(103) kg ⅐ m2, determine how much time passes
before the line of sight of the initially stationary
spacecraft drifts by 1 arc-second, which is 1/3600
degree. All other elements are ﬁxed relative to the
spacecraft, and no torquing of the reaction wheel
shown is performed to correct the attitude drift.
Neglect external torques.

Review Problems

507

6/215 The mechanical ﬂyball governor operates with a
vertical shaft O-O. As the shaft speed N is increased, the rotational radius of the two 3-lb balls
tends to increase, and the 20-lb weight A is lifted
up by the collar B. Determine the steady-state
value of ␤ for a rotational speed of 150 rev/min.
Neglect the mass of the arms and collar.
O
1″ 1″

4″

β

β

20 lb
2″

A

3 lb

3 lb

B

4″

N
G
1″ 1″
O

x

Problem 6/215

Problem 6/213

6/214 Each of the solid square blocks is allowed to fall by
rotating clockwise from the rest positions shown.
The support at O in case (a) is a hinge and in case
(b) is a small roller. Determine the angular velocity
␻ of each block as edge OC becomes horizontal just
before striking the supporting surface.
m
m

m
m

v0

O

25
0

m

m

25
0

B

m

m

A

C

A

0
25

0
25

A

6/216 In an acrobatic stunt, man A of mass mA drops
from a raised platform onto the end of the light but
strong beam with a velocity v0. The boy of mass mB
is propelled upward with a velocity vB. For a given
ratio n ϭ mB/mA determine b in terms of L to maximize the upward velocity of the boy. Assume that
both man and boy act as rigid bodies.

C

b
L

45°

Hinge

O

Roller

45° O

(a)

(b)
Problem 6/214

Problem 6/216

508

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

6/217 The small block of mass m slides in the smooth
radial slot of the disk, which turns freely in its bearing. If the block is displaced slightly from the center
position when the angular velocity of the disk is ␻0,
determine its radical velocity vr as a function of the
radical distance r. The mass moment of inertia of
the disk about its axis of rotation is IO.

rd

᭤6/219 Before it hits the ground a falling chimney, such as
the one shown, will usually crack at the point
where the bending moment is greatest. Show that
the position of maximum moment occurs at the
center of percussion relative to the upper end for a
slender chimney of constant cross section. Neglect
any restraining moment at the base.

r
m

ω0

IO

Problem 6/217

6/218 The 6-lb pendulum with mass center at G is pivoted at A to the ﬁxed support CA. It has a radius of
gyration of 17 in. about O-O and swings through
an amplitude ␪ ϭ 60Њ. For the instant when the
pendulum is in the extreme position, calculate the
moments Mx, My, and Mz applied by the base support to the column at C.
z
8″

O

Problem 6/219

᭤ 6/220 The two slender bars, each having a mass of 4 kg,
are hinged at B and pivoted at C. If a horizontal impulse ͐F dt ϭ 14 N ⅐ s is applied to the end A of the
lower bar during an interval of 0.1 s during which
the bars are still essentially in their vertical rest
positions, compute the angular velocity ␻2 of the
upper bar immediately after the impulse.

A
C

O
20″

θ

16″
1.2 m
G
B

x
C

1.2 m

y
F
Problem 6/218

A

Problem 6/220

Article 6/9

Review Problems

B

*Computer-Oriented Problems
*6/221 The system of Prob. 6/120 is repeated here. If the
1.2-kg uniform slender bar is released from rest
in the position ␪ ϭ 0 where the spring is unstretched, determine and plot its angular velocity
as a function of ␪ over the range 0 Յ ␪ Յ ␪max,
where ␪max is the value of ␪ at which the bar momentarily comes to rest. The value of the spring
constant k is 100 N/m, and friction can be neglected. State the maximum angular speed and
the value of ␪ at which it occurs.

509

θ

4′

A

B
Problem 6/223
0.6 m
k
O
θ

A

0.6 m

1.2 kg

*6/224 The cart B moves to the right with acceleration
a ϭ 2g. If m ϭ 0.5 kg, l ϭ 0.6 m, and K ϭ 75
N ⅐ m/rad, determine the steady-state angular deﬂection ␪ of the uniform slender rod of mass 3m.
Treat the small end sphere of mass m as a particle.
The spring, which exerts a moment of magnitude
M ϭ K␪ on the rod, is undeformed when the rod is
vertical.
m

0.2 m

θ

Problem 6/221

*6/222 The crate slides down the incline with velocity v1
and its corner strikes a small obstacle at A. Determine the minimum required velocity v1 if the crate
is to rotate about A so that it travels on the conveyor belt on its side as indicated in the ﬁgure.
Plot the variation of v1 with ␣ for 0 Յ ␣ Յ 45Њ.
2′

v1

2′
α

A

Problem 6/222

*6/223 The uniform 4-ft slender bar with light end rollers
is released from rest in the vertical plane with ␪
essentially zero. Determine and graph the velocity
of A as a function of ␪ and ﬁnd the maximum velocity of A and the corresponding angle ␪.

3m

O

l

K

B

Problem 6/224

a

510

Chapter 6

Plane Kinetics of Rigid Bodies

*6/225 The steel I-beam is to be transported by the overhead trolley to which it is hinged at O. If the trol˙
ley starts from rest with ␪ ϭ ␪ ϭ 0 and is given a
constant horizontal acceleration a ϭ 2 m/s2, ﬁnd
˙
the maximum values of ␪ and ␪. The magnitude
of the initial swing would constitute a shop safety
consideration.

*6/227 The 1.2-kg uniform slender bar has a 0.6-kg particle attached to its end. The spring constant is
k ϭ 300 N/m and the distance b ϭ 200 mm. If the
bar is released from rest in the horizontal position
shown where the spring is unstretched, determine
the maximum angular deﬂection ␪max of the bar.
Also determine the value of the angular velocity at
␪ ϭ ␪max/2. Neglect friction.

a
k
O
C

b
––
4
4m

O

1.2 kg

B

A

0.6 kg

θ
3b
––
4

b
––
4

Problem 6/227

Problem 6/225

*6/226 The uniform power pole of mass m and length L is
hoisted into a vertical position with its lower end
supported by a ﬁxed pivot at O. The guy wires supporting the pole are accidentally released, and the
pole falls to the ground. Plot the x- and y-components of the force exerted on the pole at O in terms
of ␪ from 0 to 90Њ. Can you explain why Oy increases
again after going to zero?

*6/228 The uniform 100-kg beam AB is hanging initially
at rest with ␪ ϭ 0 when the constant force P ϭ 300 N
is applied to the cable. Determine (a) the maximum
angular velocity reached by the beam with the corresponding angle ␪ and (b) the maximum angle
␪max reached by the beam.
3m
A
C
P

θ
3m
y

L

B
Problem 6/228

θ

O

1m

x

Problem 6/226

Article 6/9
*6/229 The 30-kg slender bar has an initial angular velocity ␻0 ϭ 4 rad/s in the vertical position, where
the spring is unstretched. Determine the minimum angular velocity ␻min reached by the bar
and the corresponding angle ␪. Also ﬁnd the
angular velocity of the bar as it strikes the horizontal surface.
A

1.2
m

z

θ
A

k = 3 kN/m

θ

511

*6/230 The 60-ft telephone pole of essentially uniform
diameter is being hoisted into the vertical position
by two cables attached at B as shown. The end O
rests on a ﬁxed support and cannot slip. When the
pole is nearly vertical, the ﬁtting at B suddenly
breaks, releasing both cables. When the angle ␪
reaches 10Њ, the speed of the upper end A of the
pole is 4.5 ft/sec. From this point, calculate the
time t which the workman would have to get out
of the way before the pole hits the ground. With
what speed vA does end A hit the ground?

ω0
ω

Review Problems

1.2
m
O
60′

B

1.2 m
Problem 6/229

O

x
Problem 6/230

y

By proper management of the hydraulic cylinders which support and move this flight simulator, a variety of threedimensional translational and rotational accelerations can be produced.
Angelo Giampiccolo/PhotoResearchers, Inc.

Introduction to
Three-Dimensional
Dynamics of Rigid
Bodies

7

CHAPTER OUTLINE
7/1 Introduction
Section A Kinematics
7/2 Translation
7/3 Fixed-Axis Rotation
7/4 Parallel-Plane Motion
7/5 Rotation about a Fixed Point
7/6 General Motion
Section B Kinetics
7/7 Angular Momentum
7/8 Kinetic Energy
7/9 Momentum and Energy Equations of Motion
7/10 Parallel-Plane Motion
7/11 Gyroscopic Motion: Steady Precession
7/12 Chapter Review

7/1

Introduction

Although a large percentage of dynamics problems in engineering
can be solved by the principles of plane motion, modern developments
have focused increasing attention on problems which call for the analysis of motion in three dimensions. Inclusion of the third dimension adds
considerable complexity to the kinematic and kinetic relationships. Not
only does the added dimension introduce a third component to vectors
which represent force, linear velocity, linear acceleration, and linear
momentum, but the introduction of the third dimension also adds the
possibility of two additional components for vectors representing angular quantities including moments of forces, angular velocity, angular acceleration, and angular momentum. It is in three-dimensional motion
that the full power of vector analysis is utilized.
A good background in the dynamics of plane motion is extremely
useful in the study of three-dimensional dynamics, where the approach
to problems and many of the terms are the same as or analogous to those
in two dimensions. If the study of three-dimensional dynamics is undertaken without the beneﬁt of prior study of plane-motion dynamics, more

513

514

Chapter 7

Introduction to Three-Dimensional Dynamics of Rigid Bodies

time will be required to master the principles and to become familiar
with the approach to problems.
The treatment presented in Chapter 7 is not intended as a complete
development of the three-dimensional motion of rigid bodies but merely
as a basic introduction to the subject. This introduction should, however, be sufﬁcient to solve many of the more common problems in threedimensional motion and also to lay the foundation for more advanced
study. We will proceed as we did for particle motion and for rigid-body
plane motion by ﬁrst examining the necessary kinematics and then proceeding to the kinetics.

SECTION A KINEMATICS
7/2
z
A
rA

rA /B

vA
y

rB
B

x

Figure 7/1

Translation

Figure 7/1 shows a rigid body translating in three-dimensional
space. Any two points in the body, such as A and B, will move along parallel straight lines if the motion is one of rectilinear translation or will
move along congruent curves if the motion is one of curvilinear translation. In either case, every line in the body, such as AB, remains parallel
to its original position.
The position vectors and their ﬁrst and second time derivatives are

vB

rA ϭ rB ϩ rA/B

vA ϭ vB

aA ϭ aB

where rA/B remains constant, and therefore its time derivative is zero.
Thus, all points in the body have the same velocity and the same acceleration. The kinematics of translation presents no special difﬁculty, and
further elaboration is unnecessary.

7/3

Fixed-Axis Rotation

Consider now the rotation of a rigid body about a ﬁxed axis n-n in
space with an angular velocity ␻, as shown in Fig. 7/2. The angular velocity is a vector in the direction of the rotation axis with a sense established by the familiar right-hand rule. For ﬁxed-axis rotation, ␻ does not
change its direction since it lies along the axis. We choose the origin O of
the ﬁxed coordinate system on the rotation axis for convenience. Any
point such as A which is not on the axis moves in a circular arc in a
plane normal to the axis and has a velocity
vϭ␻؋r

(7/1)

which may be seen by replacing r by h ϩ b and noting that ␻ ؋ h ϭ 0.
The acceleration of A is given by the time derivative of Eq. 7/1.
Thus,
a ϭ ␻ ؋ r ϩ ␻ ؋ (␻ ؋ r)
˙

(7/2)

Article 7/5

Rotation about a Fixed Point

515

n

n

ω

z

⋅
ω =α
Fixed
axis

b
h

A

a n = ω × (ω × r)

v=ω ×r

A

r
y

O

n

a

⋅
at = ω × r

n

x

Figure 7/2

where ˙ has been replaced by its equal, v ϭ ␻ ؋ r. The normal and tanr
gential components of a for the circular motion have the familiar magnitudes an ϭ ͉␻ ؋ (␻ ؋ r)͉ ϭ b␻2 and at ϭ ͉␻ ؋ r͉ ϭ b␣, where ␣ ϭ ␻.
˙
˙
Inasmuch as both v and a are perpendicular to ␻ and ␻, it follows that
˙
v ⅐ ␻ ϭ 0, v ⅐ ␻ ϭ 0, a ⅐ ␻ ϭ 0, and a ⅐ ␻ ϭ 0 for ﬁxed-axis rotation.
˙
˙
y

7/4

Parallel-Plane Motion

When all points in a rigid body move in planes which are parallel to
a ﬁxed plane P, Fig. 7/3, we have a general form of plane motion. The
reference plane is customarily taken through the mass center G and is
called the plane of motion. Because each point in the body, such as AЈ,
has a motion identical with the motion of the corresponding point (A) in
plane P, it follows that the kinematics of plane motion covered in Chapter 5 provides a complete description of the motion when applied to the
reference plane.

7/5

Rotation about a Fixed Point

When a body rotates about a ﬁxed point, the angular-velocity vector
no longer remains ﬁxed in direction, and this change calls for a more
general concept of rotation.

Rotation and Proper Vectors
We must ﬁrst examine the conditions under which rotation vectors
obey the parallelogram law of addition and may, therefore, be treated as
proper vectors. Consider a solid sphere, Fig. 7/4, which is cut from a
rigid body conﬁned to rotate about the ﬁxed point O.
The x-y-z axes here are taken as ﬁxed in space and do not rotate
with the body. In part a of the ﬁgure, two successive 90Њ rotations of the
sphere about, ﬁrst, the x-axis and, second, the y-axis result in the motion of a point which is initially on the y-axis in position 1, to positions 2

P

x

A
x′
G

y′ A′

z

Figure 7/3

516

Chapter 7

Introduction to Three-Dimensional Dynamics of Rigid Bodies
z

z
3

2

O
3

O
1

x

1,2
y

x

y

θ x then θ y

θ y then θ x

(a)

(b)

Figure 7/4
and 3, successively. On the other hand, if the order of the rotations is reversed, the point undergoes no motion during the y-rotation but moves
to point 3 during the 90Њ rotation about the x-axis. Thus, the two cases
do not produce the same ﬁnal position, and it is evident from this one
special example that ﬁnite rotations do not generally obey the parallelogram law of vector addition and are not commutative. Thus, ﬁnite rota⋅
ω =θ
tions may not be treated as proper vectors.
dθ1
Inﬁnitesimal rotations, however, do obey the parallelogram law of
dθ
vector addition. This fact is shown in Fig. 7/5, which represents the
combined effect of two inﬁnitesimal rotations d␪1 and d␪2 of a rigid body
about the respective axes through the ﬁxed point O. As a result of d␪1,
point A has a displacement d␪1 ؋ r, and likewise d␪2 causes a displacedθ
ment d␪2 ؋ r of point A. Either order of addition of these inﬁnitesimal
dθ 2 × r
O
displacements clearly produces the same resultant displacement, which
dθ 2
is d␪1 ؋ r ϩ d␪2 ؋ r ϭ (d␪1 ϩ d␪2) ؋ r. Thus, the two rotations are
dθ1 r
dθ × r
equivalent to the single rotation d␪ ϭ d␪1 ϩ d␪2. It follows that the anA
dθ1 × r
˙
˙
gular velocities ␻1 ϭ ␪ 1 and ␻2 ϭ ␪ 2 may be added vectorially to give
˙ ϭ ␻1 ϩ ␻2. We conclude, therefore, that at any instant of time a
␻ϭ ␪
body with one ﬁxed point is rotating instantaneously about a particular
axis passing through the ﬁxed point.
Figure 7/5

dθ 2

n

ω2

v1

ω1

v2 A

P

Figure 7/6

O

Instantaneous Axis of Rotation
To aid in visualizing the concept of the instantaneous axis of rotation, we will cite a speciﬁc example. Figure 7/6 represents a solid cylindrical rotor made of clear plastic containing many black particles
embedded in the plastic. The rotor is spinning about its shaft axis at the
steady rate ␻1, and its shaft, in turn, is rotating about the ﬁxed vertical
axis at the steady rate ␻2, with rotations in the directions indicated. If
the rotor is photographed at a certain instant during its motion, the resulting picture would show one line of black dots sharply deﬁned, indicating that, momentarily, their velocity was zero. This line of points
with no velocity establishes the instantaneous position of the axis of rotation O-n. Any dot on this line, such as A, would have equal and opposite velocity components, v1 due to ␻1 and v2 due to ␻2. All other dots,

Article 7/5

such as the one at P, would appear blurred, and their movements would
n
show as short streaks in the form of small circular arcs in planes normal
to the axis O-n. Thus, all particles of the body, except those on line O-n,
are momentarily rotating in circular arcs about the instantaneous axis
of rotation.
If a succession of photographs were taken, we would observe in each
photograph that the rotation axis would be deﬁned by a new series of
sharply-deﬁned dots and that the axis would change position both in
space and relative to the body. For rotation of a rigid body about a ﬁxed
point, then, it is seen that the rotation axis is, in general, not a line ﬁxed
in the body.

Body and Space Cones
Relative to the plastic cylinder of Fig. 7/6, the instantaneous axis of
rotation O-A-n generates a right-circular cone about the cylinder axis
called the body cone. As the two rotations continue and the cylinder
swings around the vertical axis, the instantaneous axis of rotation also
generates a right-circular cone about the vertical axis called the space
cone. These cones are shown in Fig. 7/7 for this particular example.
We see that the body cone rolls on the space cone and that the angular velocity ␻ of the body is a vector which lies along the common element of the two cones. For a more general case where the rotations are
not steady, the space and body cones are not right-circular cones, Fig.
7/8, but the body cone still rolls on the space cone.
Angular Acceleration
The angular acceleration ␣ of a rigid body in three-dimensional motion is the time derivative of its angular velocity, ␣ ϭ ␻. In contrast to
˙
the case of rotation in a single plane where the scalar ␣ measures only
the change in magnitude of the angular velocity, in three-dimensional
motion the vector ␣ reﬂects the change in direction of ␻ as well as its
change in magnitude. Thus in Fig. 7/8 where the tip of the angular velocity vector ␻ follows the space curve p and changes in both magnitude
and direction, the angular acceleration ␣ becomes a vector tangent to
this curve in the direction of the change in ␻.
When the magnitude of ␻ remains constant, the angular acceleration ␣ is normal to ␻. For this case, if we let ⍀ stand for the angular velocity with which the vector ␻ itself rotates (precesses) as it forms the
space cone, the angular acceleration may be written
␣ϭ⍀؋␻

Rotation about a Fixed Point

ω

Space cone

A
O
Body cone

Figure 7/7

Space cone

ω
Body
cone

p

⋅
α =ω

O

Figure 7/8

ω
A

r

·
v =r
=ω × r
⏐r⏐= constant

Rigid
cone
O
Ω

(7/3)

This relation is easily seen from Fig. 7/9. The upper part of the ﬁgure relates the velocity of a point A on a rigid body to its position vector from
O and the angular velocity of the body. The vectors ␣, ␻, and ⍀ in the
lower ﬁgure bear exactly the same relationship to each other as do the
vectors v, r, and ␻ in the upper ﬁgure.
If we use Fig. 7/2 to represent a rigid body rotating about a fixed
point O with the instantaneous axis of rotation n-n, we see that the

517

ω

·
α =ω
=Ω × ω
ω
⏐ ⏐ = constant

Space
cone
O

Figure 7/9

Chapter 7

Introduction to Three-Dimensional Dynamics of Rigid Bodies

velocity v and acceleration a ϭ ˙ of any point A in the body are given
v
by the same expressions as apply to the case in which the axis is fixed,
namely,
vϭ␻؋r

[7/1]

a ϭ ␻ ؋ r ϩ ␻ ؋ (␻ ؋ r)
˙

[7/2]

The one difference between the case of rotation about a ﬁxed axis
and rotation about a ﬁxed point lies in the fact that for rotation about a
ﬁxed point, the angular acceleration ␣ ϭ ␻ will have a component nor˙
mal to ␻ due to the change in direction of ␻, as well as a component in
the direction of ␻ to reﬂect any change in the magnitude of ␻. Although
any point on the rotation axis n-n momentarily will have zero velocity, it
will not have zero acceleration as long as ␻ is changing its direction. On
the other hand, for rotation about a ﬁxed axis, ␣ ϭ ␻ has only the one
˙
component along the ﬁxed axis to reﬂect the change in the magnitude of
␻. Furthermore, points which lie on the ﬁxed rotation axis clearly have
no velocity or acceleration.
Although the development in this article is for the case of rotation
about a ﬁxed point, we observe that rotation is a function solely of angular change, so that the expressions for ␻ and ␣ do not depend on the ﬁxity of the point around which rotation occurs. Thus, rotation may take
place independently of the linear motion of the rotation point. This conclusion is the three-dimensional counterpart of the concept of rotation
of a rigid body in plane motion described in Art. 5/2 and used throughout Chapters 5 and 6.

© Michael Wood/StocktrekImages, Inc.

518

The engine/propeller units at the wingtips of this aircraft can tilt from a
vertical takeoff position to a horizontal position for forward flight.

Article 7/5

Rotation about a Fixed Point

SAMPLE PROBLEM 7/1

519

z

The 0.8-m arm OA for a remote-control mechanism is pivoted about the horizontal x-axis of the clevis, and the entire assembly rotates about the z-axis with a
constant speed N ϭ 60 rev/min. Simultaneously, the arm is being raised at the
˙
constant rate ␤ ϭ 4 rad/s. For the position where ␤ ϭ 30Њ, determine (a) the angular velocity of OA, (b) the angular acceleration of OA, (c) the velocity of point A,
and (d) the acceleration of point A. If, in addition to the motion described, the vertical shaft and point O had a linear motion, say, in the z-direction, would that motion change the angular velocity or angular acceleration of OA?

N

β = 30°

O

Solution. (a) Since the arm OA is rotating about both the x- and the z-axes, it
˙
has the components ␻x ϭ ␤ ϭ 4 rad/s and ␻z ϭ 2␲N/60 ϭ 2␲(60)/60 ϭ 6.28 rad/s.
The angular velocity is

A

0.8 m

x

y
z

␻ ϭ ␻x ϩ ␻z ϭ 4i ϩ 6.28k rad/s

Ans.
ωz

ω

(b) The angular acceleration of OA is
␣ ϭ ␻ ϭ ␻x ϩ ␻z
˙ ˙
˙
Since ␻z is not changing in magnitude or direction, ␻z ϭ 0. But ␻x is changing di˙
rection and thus has a derivative which, from Eq. 7/3, is

x

⋅

y

(ω x = β )

␻x ϭ ␻z ؋ ␻x ϭ 6.28k ؋ 4i ϭ 25.1j rad/s2
˙

ᕡ Therefore,

⋅
α =ω

O

ωx

Helpful Hints
␣ ϭ 25.1j ϩ 0 ϭ 25.1j rad/s2

Ans.

ᕡ Alternatively, consider axes x-y-z to

(c) With the position vector of A given by r ϭ 0.693j ϩ 0.4k m, the velocity of A
from Eq. 7/1 becomes

be attached to the vertical shaft and
clevis so that they rotate. The deriv˙
ative of ␻x becomes ␻x ϭ 4i . But
˙
from Eq. 5/11, we have ˙ ϭ ␻z ؋ i ϭ
i
6.28k ؋ i ϭ 6.28j. Thus, ␣ ϭ ␻x ϭ
˙
4(6.28)j ϭ 25.1j rad/s2 as before.

Ans.

(d) The acceleration of A from Eq. 7/2 is
a ϭ ␻ ؋ r ϩ ␻ ؋ (␻ ؋ r)
˙
ϭ␣؋rϩ␻؋v

ᕢ To compare methods, it is suggested

ϭ (10.05i) ϩ (10.05i Ϫ 38.4j Ϫ 6.40k)

ᕢ

ϭ 20.1i Ϫ 38.4j Ϫ 6.40k m/s

2

Ans.

˙
The angular motion of OA depends only on the angular changes N and ␤ , so any
linear motion of O does not affect ␻ and ␣.

that these results for v and a be obtained by applying Eqs. 2/18 and
2/19 for particle motion in spherical
coordinates, changing symbols as
necessary.

520

Chapter 7

Introduction to Three-Dimensional Dynamics of Rigid Bodies

SAMPLE PROBLEM 7/2

x

Z

The electric motor with an attached disk is running at a constant low speed
of 120 rev/min in the direction shown. Its housing and mounting base are initially at rest. The entire assembly is next set in rotation about the vertical Z-axis
at the constant rate N ϭ 60 rev/min with a ﬁxed angle ␥ of 30Њ. Determine (a)
the angular velocity and angular acceleration of the disk, (b) the space and body
cones, and (c) the velocity and acceleration of point A at the top of the disk for
the instant shown.

A

C

N

(a) The rotor and disk have two components of angular velocity: ␻0 ϭ

␻ ϭ ␻0 ϩ ⍀ ϭ ␻0k ϩ ⍀K

y

ω

Ω = 2π
rad /sec

ω y = 3π
rad /sec

ϭ ␻0k ϩ ⍀(j cos ␥ ϩ k sin ␥) ϭ (⍀ cos ␥)j ϩ (␻0 ϩ ⍀ sin ␪)k

γ

—
—
OC = 10″
—
—
CA = 5″

Z

ᕡ

ω0

O

Solution. The axes x-y-z with unit vectors i, j, k are attached to the motor
frame, with the z-axis coinciding with the rotor axis and the x-axis coinciding
with the horizontal axis through O about which the motor tilts. The Z-axis is
vertical and carries the unit vector K ϭ j cos ␥ ϩ k sin ␥.

120(2␲)/60 ϭ 4␲ rad/sec about the z-axis and ⍀ ϭ 60(2␲)/60 ϭ 2␲ rad/sec
about the Z-axis. Thus, the angular velocity becomes

z

y

z

γ = 30°

ω z = 5π rad /sec
ω 0 = 4π rad /sec

O

ϭ (2␲ cos 30Њ)j ϩ (4␲ ϩ 2␲ sin 30Њ)k ϭ ␲(Ί3j ϩ 5.0k) rad/sec
Ans.

Z

The angular acceleration of the disk from Eq. 7/3 is

ᕢ

␣ϭ␻ϭ⍀؋␻
˙
ϭ ⍀(j cos ␥ ϩ k sin ␥) ؋ [(⍀ cos ␥)j ϩ (␻0 ϩ ⍀ sin ␥)k]

z

ω

ϭ ⍀(␻0 cos ␥ ϩ ⍀ sin ␥ cos ␥)i Ϫ (⍀2 sin ␥ cos ␥)i

ᕣ

ϭ (⍀␻0 cos ␥)i ϭ i(2␲)(4␲) cos 30Њ ϭ 68.4i rad/sec2

Ans.

Space
cone

O

(b) The angular velocity vector ␻ is the common element of the space and body

Body cone

cones which may now be constructed as shown.

(c) The position vector of point A for the instant considered is

Helpful Hints

ᕡ Note that ␻0 ϩ ⍀ ϭ ␻ ϭ ␻y ϩ ␻z as

r ϭ 5j ϩ 10k in.

shown on the vector diagram.

From Eq. 7/1 the velocity of A is

ᕢ Remember that Eq. 7/3 gives the
Ans.

From Eq. 7/2 the acceleration of point A is

ᕣ Since the magnitude of ␻ is con-

a ϭ ␻ ؋ r ϩ ␻ ؋ (␻ ؋ r) ϭ ␣ ؋ r ϩ ␻ ؋ v
˙
ϭ 68.4i ؋ (5j ϩ 10k) ϩ ␲(Ί3j ϩ 5k) ؋ (Ϫ7.68␲i)
ϭ Ϫ1063j ϩ 473k in./sec2

complete expression for ␣ only for
steady precession where ͉␻͉ is constant, which applies to this problem.

Ans.

stant, ␣ must be tangent to the base
circle of the space cone, which puts
it in the plus x-direction in agreement with our calculated conclusion.

Article 7/5

PROBLEMS

Problems

521

z
N

Introductory Problems

y

7/1 Place your textbook on your desk, with ﬁxed axes oriented as shown. Rotate the book about the x-axis
through a 90Њ angle and then from this new position
rotate it 90Њ about the y-axis. Sketch the ﬁnal position
of the book. Repeat the process but reverse the order
of rotation. From your results, state your conclusion
concerning the vector addition of ﬁnite rotations. Reconcile your observations with Fig. 7/4.

P

A

O

8″

4″

12″
x

z

y
Problem 7/3

7/4 A timing mechanism consists of the rotating distributor arm AB and the ﬁxed contact C. If the arm rotates
about the ﬁxed axis OA with a constant angular velocity ␻ ϭ 30(3i ϩ 2j ϩ 6k) rad/s, and if the coordinates
of the contact C expressed in millimeters are (20, 30,
80), determine the magnitude of the acceleration of
the tip B of the distributor arm as it passes point C.
x
Problem 7/1

A

C

7/2 Repeat the experiment of Prob. 7/1 but use a small
angle of rotation, say, 5Њ. Note the near-equal ﬁnal positions for the two different rotation sequences. What
does this observation lead you to conclude for the
combination of inﬁnitesimal rotations and for the
time derivatives of angular quantities? Reconcile your
observations with Fig. 7/5.
7/3 The solid cylinder is rotating about the ﬁxed axis OA
with a constant speed N ϭ 600 rev/min in the direction shown. If the x- and y-components of the velocity
of point P are 12 ft/sec and Ϫ6 ft/sec, determine its
z-component of velocity and the radial distance R from
P to the rotation axis. Also ﬁnd the magnitude of the
acceleration of P.

z
30 mm

B

y

O

x
Problem 7/4

522

Chapter 7

Introduction to Three-Dimensional Dynamics of Rigid Bodies

7/5 The rotor and shaft are mounted in a clevis which can
rotate about the z-axis with an angular velocity ⍀.
With ⍀ ϭ 0 and ␪ constant, the rotor has an angular
velocity ␻0 ϭ Ϫ4j Ϫ 3k rad/s. Find the velocity vA of
point A on the rim if its position vector at this instant
is r ϭ 0.5i ϩ 1.2j ϩ 1.1k m. What is the rim speed vB
of any point B?

7/7 The rotor B spins about its inclined axis OA at the
speed N1 ϭ 200 rev/min, where ␤ ϭ 30Њ. Simultaneously, the assembly rotates about the vertical z-axis at
the rate N2. If the total angular velocity of the rotor
has a magnitude of 40 rad/s, determine N2.
z

v
N2

z

ω0

B

O

β

A

x
y

θ
B
N1

y

Ω

A
x
Problem 7/7

7/8 A slender rod bent into the shape shown rotates about
the ﬁxed line CD at a constant angular rate ␻. Determine the velocity and acceleration of point A.
Problem 7/5

z

7/6 The disk rotates with a spin velocity of 15 rad/s about
its horizontal z-axis ﬁrst in the direction (a) and second in the direction (b). The assembly rotates with
the velocity N ϭ 10 rad/s about the vertical axis. Construct the space and body cones for each case.

D

θ
l

O

y

x
(b)

d

ω

C
h

z
N

A
(a)

Problem 7/6

Problem 7/8

Article 7/5
7/9 The rod is hinged about the axis O-O of the clevis,
which is attached to the end of the vertical shaft. The
shaft rotates with a constant angular ␻0 as shown. If ␪
˙
is decreasing at the constant rate Ϫ ␪ ϭ p, write expressions for the angular velocity ␻ and angular acceleration ␣ of the rod.
z

ω0

O

A

523

Representative Problems
7/11 The motor of Sample Problem 7/2 is shown again
here. If the motor pivots about the x-axis at the constant rate ␥ ϭ 3␲ rad/sec with no rotation about the
˙
Z-axis (N ϭ 0), determine the angular acceleration ␣
of the rotor and disk as the position ␥ ϭ 30Њ is passed.
The constant speed of the motor is 120 rev/min. Also
ﬁnd the velocity and acceleration of point A, which is
on the top of the disk for this position.
x

Z

A

O

Problems

z

y

θ

C

ω0

γ

O

x

—
—
OC = 10″
—
—
CA = 5″

y
N

Problem 7/9

7/10 The panel assembly and attached x-y-z axes rotate
with a constant angular velocity ⍀ ϭ 0.6 rad/sec
about the vertical z-axis. Simultaneously, the panels
rotate about the y-axis as shown with a constant rate
␻0 ϭ 2 rad/sec. Determine the angular acceleration ␣
of panel A and ﬁnd the acceleration of point P for
the instant when ␤ ϭ 90Њ.
P

16″

20″
y

A
z

β

Problem 7/11

7/12 If the motor of Sample Problem 7/2, repeated in Prob.
7/11, reaches a speed of 3000 rev/min in 2 seconds from
rest with constant acceleration, determine the total angular acceleration of the rotor and disk 1 second after it
3
is turned on if the turntable is rotating at a constant
rate N ϭ 30 rev/min. The angle ␥ ϭ 30Њ is constant.
7/13 The spool A rotates about its axis with an angular
velocity of 20 rad/s, ﬁrst in the sense of ␻a and second in the sense of ␻b. Simultaneously, the assembly
rotates about the vertical axis with an angular velocity ␻1 ϭ 10 rad/s. Determine the magnitude ␻ of the
total angular velocity of the spool and construct the
body and space cones for the spool for each case.
ωa

ω0

ω0
O
Ω

18″
60°

x

ωb
A

O
B

ω1

Problem 7/10
Problem 7/13

524

Chapter 7

Introduction to Three-Dimensional Dynamics of Rigid Bodies

7/14 In manipulating the dumbbell, the jaws of the robotic
device have an angular velocity ␻p ϭ 2 rad/s about
the axis OG with ␥ ﬁxed at 60Њ. The entire assembly
rotates about the vertical Z-axis at the constant rate
⍀ ϭ 0.8 rad/s. Determine the angular velocity ␻ and
angular acceleration ␣ of the dumbbell. Express the
results in terms of the given orientation of axes x-y-z,
where the y-axis is parallel to the Y-axis.
z

ω3

z
ω4

ω5

θ

O1

Z
G

A

O2

ω1

m

ωp

β

a

ω2

y

x
y

a

m

γ

O

x
X

Problem 7/16
Y
Ω

Problem 7/14

7/15 Determine the angular acceleration ␣ of the dumbbell of Prob. 7/14 for the conditions stated, except
that ⍀ is increasing at the rate of 3 rad/s2 for the instant under consideration.
7/16 The robot shown has ﬁve degrees of rotational freedom. The x-y-z axes are attached to the base ring,
which rotates about the z-axis at the rate ␻1. The
˙
arm O1O2 rotates about the x-axis at the rate ␻2 ϭ ␪ .
The control arm O2 A rotates about axis O1-O2 at the
rate ␻3 and about a perpendicular axis through O2
which is momentarily parallel to the x-axis at the
˙
rate ␻4 ϭ ␤ . Finally, the jaws rotate about axis O2-A
at the rate ␻5. The magnitudes of all angular rates are
constant. For the conﬁguration shown, determine the
magnitude ␻ of the total angular velocity of the jaws
˙
for ␪ ϭ 60Њ and ␤ ϭ 45Њ if ␻1 ϭ 2 rad/s, ␪ ϭ 1.5 rad/s,
and ␻3 ϭ ␻4 ϭ ␻5 ϭ 0. Also express the angular acceleration ␣ of arm O1O2 as a vector.

7/17 For the robot of Prob. 7/16, determine the angular
velocity ␻ and angular acceleration ␣ of the jaws A if
␪ ϭ 60Њ and ␤ ϭ30Њ, both constant, and if ␻1 ϭ 2 rad/s,
␻2 ϭ ␻3 ϭ ␻4 ϭ 0, and ␻5 ϭ 0.8 rad/s, all constant.
7/18 The wheel rolls without slipping in a circular arc of
radius R and makes one complete turn about the
vertical y-axis with constant speed in time ␶. Determine the vector expression for the angular acceleration ␣ of the wheel and construct the space and body
cones.
y
R
x

O
A

r

Problem 7/18

z

Article 7/5
7/19 Determine expressions for the velocity v and acceleration a of point A on the wheel of Prob. 7/18 for the
position shown, where A crosses the horizontal line
through the center of the wheel.
7/20 The circular disk of 120-mm radius rotates about the
z-axis at the constant rate ␻z ϭ 20 rad/s, and the entire assembly rotates about the ﬁxed x-axis at the
constant rate ␻x ϭ 10 rad/s. Calculate the magnitudes of the velocity v and acceleration a of point B
for the instant when ␪ ϭ 30Њ.

Z
z

120
mm

·
Ω=β

s
b

B
A

θ

O
y′

200
mm

θ
β
Y

β

X

O

y

x

ωx

x

525

7/22 The design of the rotating arm OA of a control
mechanism requires that it rotate about the vertical
˙
Z-axis at the constant rate ⍀ ϭ ␤ ϭ ␲ rad/s. Simultaneously, OA oscillates according to ␪ ϭ ␪0 sin 4⍀t,
where ␪0 ϭ ␲/6 radians and t is in seconds measured
from the time when ␤ ϭ 0. Determine the angular
velocity ␻ and the angular acceleration ␣ of OA for
the instant (a) when t ϭ 1/2 s and (b) when t ϭ 1/8 s.
The x-y reference axes rotate in the X-Y plane with
the angular velocity ⍀.

z

ωz

Problems

Problem 7/22
y

Problem 7/20

7/21 The crane has a boom of length OP ϭ 24 m and is
revolving about the vertical axis at the constant
rate of 2 rev/min in the direction shown. Simultaneously, the boom is being lowered at the constant
˙
rate ␤ ϭ 0.10 rad/s. Calculate the magnitudes of the
velocity and acceleration of the end P of the boom
for the instant when it passes the position ␤ ϭ 30Њ.
P

β
O

ω

Problem 7/21

7/23 For the rotating and oscillating control arm OA of
Prob. 7/22, determine the velocity v and acceleration
a of the ball tip A for the condition when t ϭ 1/2 s.
Distance b ϭ 120 mm, s ϭ 100 mm, and ␪ ϭ ␪0 sin 4⍀t
as deﬁned in Prob. 7/22 with ⍀ ϭ ␲ rad/s and
␪0 ϭ ␲/6 rad.
7/24 If the angular velocity ␻0 ϭ Ϫ4j Ϫ 3k rad/s of the
rotor in Prob. 7/5 is constant in magnitude, determine the angular acceleration ␣ of the rotor for
˙
(a) ⍀ ϭ 0 and ␪ ϭ 2 rad/s (both constant) and
Ϫ1(3 ) and ⍀ ϭ 2 rad/s (both constant).
(b) ␪ ϭ tan 4
Find the magnitude of the acceleration of point A in
each case, where A has the position vector
r ϭ 0.5i ϩ 1.2j ϩ 1.1k m at the instant represented.

526

Chapter 7

Introduction to Three-Dimensional Dynamics of Rigid Bodies

7/25 The vertical shaft and attached clevis rotate about
the z-axis at the constant rate ⍀ ϭ 4 rad/s. Simultaneously, the shaft B revolves about its axis OA at the
constant rate ␻0 ϭ 3 rad/s, and the angle ␥ is decreasing at the constant rate of ␲/4 rad/s. Determine the
angular velocity ␻ and the magnitude of the angular
acceleration ␣ of shaft B when ␥ ϭ 30Њ. The x-y-z axes
are attached to the clevis and rotate with it.

᭤7/27 The pendulum oscillates about the x-axis according
␲
to ␪ ϭ sin 3␲t radians, where t is the time in seconds.
6
Simultaneously, the shaft OA revolves about the vertical z-axis at the constant rate ␻z ϭ 2␲ rad/sec.
Determine the velocity v and acceleration a of the
center B of the pendulum as well as its angular acceleration ␣ for the instant when t ϭ 0.
z

z

ωz

y

4″
ω0

O

O

B

A

A
x

x

γ

Ω

8″

θ

y

Problem 7/25

B

᭤ 7/26 The right-circular cone A rolls on the fixed rightcircular cone B at a constant rate and makes one
complete trip around B every 4 seconds. Compute
the magnitude of the angular acceleration ␣ of cone
A during its motion.
Z
z

150 mm

B

Problem 7/27

᭤7/28 The solid right-circular cone of base radius r and
height h rolls on a flat surface without slipping.
The center B of the circular base moves in a circular path around the z-axis with a constant speed v.
Determine the angular velocity ␻ and the angular
acceleration ␣ of the solid cone.
z

A

150 mm

50 mm

B
h
r
r

O
Problem 7/26

x

O

A
y
Problem 7/28

Article 7/6

7/6

General Motion

527

General Motion

The kinematic analysis of a rigid body which has general threedimensional motion is best accomplished with the aid of our principles
of relative motion. We have applied these principles to problems in
plane motion and now extend them to space motion. We will make use
of both translating axes and rotating reference axes.

vA ϭ vB ϩ vA/B

ω
A
rA

[5/4]

aA ϭ aB ϩ aA/B

[5/7]

O

y

rB

x
X

Figure 7/10

(7/4)

where ␻ and ␻ are the instantaneous angular velocity and angular accel˙
eration of the body, respectively.
The selection of the reference point B is quite arbitrary in theory. In
practice, point B is chosen for convenience as some point in the body
whose motion is known in whole or in part. If point A is chosen as the
reference point, the relative-motion equations become
vB ϭ vA ϩ ␻ ؋ rB/A
aB ϭ aA ϩ ␻ ؋ rB/A ϩ ␻ ؋ (␻ ؋ rB/A)
˙
where rB/A ϭ ϪrA/B. It should be clear that ␻ and, thus, ␻ are the same
˙
vectors for either formulation since the absolute angular motion of the
body is independent of the choice of reference point. When we come to

© Jim Sugar/CORBIS

aA ϭ aB ϩ ␻ ؋ rA/B ϩ ␻ ؋ (␻ ؋ rA/B)
˙

Y

rA/B

B

which were developed in Arts. 5/4 and 5/6 for the plane motion of rigid
bodies. These expressions also hold in three dimensions, where the
three vectors for each of the equations are also coplanar.
In applying these relations to rigid-body motion in space, we note
from Fig. 7/10 that the distance AB remains constant. Thus, from an observer’s position on x-y-z, the body appears to rotate about the point B
and point A appears to lie on a spherical surface with B as the center.
Consequently, we may view the general motion as a translation of the
body with the motion of B plus a rotation of the body about B.
The relative-motion terms represent the effect of the rotation about
B and are identical to the velocity and acceleration expressions discussed in the previous article for rotation of a rigid body about a ﬁxed
point. Therefore, the relative-velocity and relative-acceleration equations may be written
vA ϭ vB ϩ ␻ ؋ rA/B

z

Z

Translating Reference Axes
Figure 7/10 shows a rigid body which has an angular velocity ␻. We
may choose any convenient point B as the origin of a translating reference system x-y-z. The velocity v and acceleration a of any other point A
in the body are given by the relative-velocity and relative-acceleration
expressions

This time-lapse photo of a VTOL aircraft shows a three-dimensional combination of translation and rotation.

528

Chapter 7

Introduction to Three-Dimensional Dynamics of Rigid Bodies

the kinetic equations for general motion, we will see that the mass center of a body is frequently the most convenient reference point to
choose.
If points A and B in Fig. 7/10 represent the ends of a rigid control
link in a spatial mechanism where the end connections act as ball-andsocket joints (as in Sample Problem 7/3), it is necessary to impose certain kinematic requirements. Clearly, any rotation of the link about its
own axis AB does not affect the action of the link. Thus, the angular velocity ␻n whose vector is normal to the link describes its action. It is necessary, therefore, that ␻n and rA/B be at right angles, and this condition
is satisﬁed if ␻n ⅐ rA/B ϭ 0.
Similarly, it is only the component ␣n* of the angular acceleration of
the link normal to AB which affects its action, so that ␣n ⅐ rA/B ϭ 0 must
also hold.

Z
Ω (Axes)
z

ω (Body)
A

rA
O

y
Y

rA/B

rB
B
x

X

Figure 7/11

Rotating Reference Axes
A more general formulation of the motion of a rigid body in space
calls for the use of reference axes which rotate as well as translate. The
description of Fig. 7/10 is modiﬁed in Fig. 7/11 to show reference axes
whose origin is attached to the reference point B as before, but which
rotate with an absolute angular velocity ⍀ which may be different from
the absolute angular velocity ␻ of the body.
We now make use of Eqs. 5/11, 5/12, 5/13, and 5/14 developed in Art.
5/7 for describing the plane motion of a rigid body with the use of rotating axes. The extension of these relations from two to three dimensions
is easily accomplished by merely including the z-component of the vectors, and this step is left to the student to carry out. Replacing ␻ in these
equations by the angular velocity ⍀ of our rotating x-y-z axes gives us

˙ϭ⍀؋i
i

˙ϭ⍀؋j
j

˙
kϭ⍀؋k

(7/5)

for the time derivatives of the rotating unit vectors attached to x-y-z.
The expression for the velocity and acceleration of point A become
vA ϭ vB ϩ ⍀ ؋ rA/B ϩ vrel

˙
aA ϭ aB ϩ ⍀ ؋ rA/B ϩ ⍀ ؋ (⍀ ؋ rA/B) ϩ 2⍀ ؋ vrel ϩ arel

(7/6)

x
y
z
x
y
z
where vrel ϭ ˙i ϩ ˙j ϩ ˙k and arel ϭ ¨i ϩ ¨j ϩ ¨k are, respectively, the
velocity and acceleration of point A measured relative to x-y-z by an observer attached to x-y-z.
We again note that ⍀ is the angular velocity of the axes and may be
different from the angular velocity ␻ of the body. Also we note that rA/B remains constant in magnitude for points A and B ﬁxed to a rigid body, but it
will change direction with respect to x-y-z when the angular velocity ⍀ of
the axes is different from the angular velocity ␻ of the body. We observe

*It may be shown that ␣n ϭ ␻n if the angular velocity of the link about its own axis is not
˙
changing. See the ﬁrst author’s Dynamics, 2nd Edition, SI Version, 1975, John Wiley &
Sons, Art. 37.

Article 7/6

General Motion

529

further that, if x-y-z are rigidly attached to the body, ⍀ ϭ ␻ and vrel and
arel are both zero, which makes the equations identical to Eqs. 7/4.
In Art. 5/7 we also developed the relationship (Eq. 5/13) between
the time derivative of a vector V as measured in the ﬁxed X-Y system
and the time derivative of V as measured relative to the rotating x-y system. For our three-dimensional case, this relation becomes

΂dV΃
dt

XYZ

ϭ

΂dV΃
dt

xyz

ϩ⍀؋V

(7/7)

When we apply this transformation to the relative-position vector rA/B ϭ
rA Ϫ rB for our rigid body of Fig. 7/11, we obtain

΂ dt ΃
drA

XYZ

ϭ

΂ dt ΃
drB

XYZ

ϩ

΂

drA/B
dt

΃

xyz

ϩ ⍀ ؋ rA/B

or
vA ϭ vB ϩ vrel ϩ ⍀ ؋ rA/B

΂d[dt ]΃

XYZ

΂d[dt ]΃

ϭ

xyz

ϩ⍀؋[

]

© Giles Barnard/AgeFotostock America, Inc.

which gives us the ﬁrst of Eqs. 7/6.
Equations 7/6 are particularly useful when the reference axes are
attached to a moving body within which relative motion occurs.
Equation 7/7 may be recast as the vector operator
(7/7a)

where [ ] stands for any vector V expressible both in X-Y-Z and in x-yz. If we apply the operator to itself, we obtain the second time derivative, which becomes
[
΂d dt ]΃
2

2

XYZ

ϭ

[
΂d dt ]΃
2

2

ϩ 2⍀ ؋

xyz

˙
ϩ⍀؋[

΂d[dt ]΃

] ϩ ⍀ ؋ (⍀ ؋ [

])
(7/7b)

xyz

This exercise is left to the student. Note that the form of Eq. 7/7b is the
same as that of the second of Eqs. 7/6 expressed for aA/B ϭ aA Ϫ aB.

Robots welding automobile unitbodies.

530

Chapter 7

Introduction to Three-Dimensional Dynamics of Rigid Bodies

SAMPLE PROBLEM 7/3
50

Crank CB rotates about the horizontal axis with an angular velocity ␻1 ϭ 6
rad/s which is constant for a short interval of motion which includes the position
shown. The link AB has a ball-and-socket ﬁtting on each end and connects crank
DA with CB. For the instant shown, determine the angular velocity ␻2 of crank
DA and the angular velocity ␻n of link AB.

mm

ω2
D
vA
z

A

C 100

Solution.

mm

The relative-velocity relation, Eq. 7/4, will be solved ﬁrst using

ᕡ translating reference axes attached to B. The equation is

100 mm

ω1

vA ϭ vB ϩ ␻n ؋ rA/B

ᕢ where ␻n is the angular velocity of link AB taken normal to AB. The velocities of
A and B are
[v ϭ r␻]

vA ϭ 50␻2 j

x
y
vB

100 m

m

vB ϭ 100(6)i ϭ 600i mm/s

B

Also rA/B ϭ 50i ϩ 100j ϩ 100k mm. Substitution into the velocity relation gives
Helpful Hints

ᕡ We select B as the reference point

Expanding the determinant and equating the coefﬁcients of the i, j, k terms give
Ϫ6 ϭ

0ϭ

ᕢ The angular velocity ␻ of AB is

ϩ ␻n y Ϫ ␻n z

␻2 ϭ Ϫ2␻nx

since its motion can easily be determined from the given angular velocity ␻1 of CB.
taken as a vector ␻n normal to AB
since any rotation of the link about
its own axis AB has no inﬂuence on
the behavior of the linkage.

ϩ ␻n z

2␻nxϪ ␻ny

These equations may be solved for ␻2, which becomes
␻2 ϭ 6 rad/s

Ans.

As they stand, the three equations incorporate the fact that ␻n is normal to vA/B,
but they cannot be solved until the requirement that ␻n be normal to rA/B is inᕣ cluded. Thus,
[␻n ⅐ rA/B ϭ 0]

50␻nx ϩ 100␻ny ϩ 100␻nz ϭ 0

Combination with two of the three previous equations yields the solutions
8

␻nx ϭ Ϫ4 rad/s
3

␻ny ϭ Ϫ3 rad/s

10

␻nz ϭ 3 rad/s

Thus,
␻n ϭ 2 (Ϫ2i Ϫ 4j ϩ 5k) rad/s
3
with
2

␻n ϭ 3Ί22 ϩ 42 ϩ 52 ϭ 2Ί5 rad/s

Ans.

ᕣ The relative-velocity equation may
be written as vA Ϫ vB ϭ vA/B ϭ
␻n ؋ rA/B, which requires that vA/B
be perpendicular to both ␻n and
rA/B. This equation alone does not
incorporate the additional requirement that ␻n be perpendicular to
rA/B. Thus, we must also satisfy
␻n ⅐ rA/B ϭ 0.

Article 7/6

General Motion

531

SAMPLE PROBLEM 7/4
Determine the angular acceleration ␻2 of crank AD in Sample Problem 7/3
˙
for the conditions cited. Also ﬁnd the angular acceleration ␻n of link AB.
˙

Solution.

The accelerations of the links may be found from the second of Eqs.
7/4, which may be written
aA ϭ aB ϩ ␻n ؋ rA/B ϩ ␻n ؋ (␻n ؋ rA/B)
˙
where ␻n, as in Sample Problem 7/3, is the angular velocity of AB taken normal

ᕡ to AB. The angular acceleration of AB is written as ␻n.
˙

In terms of their normal and tangential components, the accelerations of A
and B are
aA ϭ 50␻22i ϩ 50␻2 j ϭ 1800i ϩ 50␻2 j mm/s2
˙
˙
aB ϭ 100␻12k ϩ (0)i ϭ 3600k mm/s2
Also
␻n ؋ (␻n ؋ rA/B) ϭ Ϫ␻n2rA/B ϭ Ϫ20(50i ϩ 100j ϩ 100k) mm/s2
␻n ؋ rA/B ϭ (100␻ny Ϫ 100␻nz)i
˙
˙
˙

Helpful Hints

ᕡ If the link AB had an angular velocity component along AB, then a
change in both magnitude and direction of this component could occur
which would contribute to the actual
angular acceleration of the link as a
rigid body. However, since any rotation about its own axis AB has no inﬂuence on the motion of the cranks
at C and D, we will concern ourselves only with ␻n.
˙

ϩ (50␻nz Ϫ 100␻nx)j ϩ (100␻nx Ϫ 50␻ny)k
˙
˙
˙
˙
Substitution into the relative-acceleration equation and equating respective coefﬁcients of i, j, k give
28 ϭ

␻ny Ϫ ␻nz
˙
˙

␻2 ϩ 40 ϭ Ϫ2␻nx
˙
˙
Ϫ32 ϭ

ϩ ␻n z
˙

2␻nx Ϫ ␻ny
˙
˙

Solution of these equations for ␻2 gives
˙
␻2 ϭ Ϫ36 rad/s2
˙

ᕢ

Ans.

The vector ␻n is normal to rA/B but is not normal to vA/B, as was the case
˙
with ␻n.
[␻n ⅐ rA/B ϭ 0]
˙

2␻nx ϩ 4␻ny ϩ 4␻nz ϭ 0
˙
˙
˙

which, when combined with the preceding relations for these same quantities,
gives
␻nx ϭ Ϫ8 rad/s2
˙

␻ny ϭ 16 rad/s2
˙

␻nz ϭ Ϫ12 rad/s2
˙

Thus,
␻n ϭ 4(Ϫ2i ϩ 4j Ϫ 3k) rad/s2
˙

Ans.

͉␻n ͉ ϭ 4Ί22 ϩ 42 ϩ 32 ϭ 4Ί29 rad/s2
˙

Ans.

and

ᕢ The component of ␻n which is not
˙
normal to vA/B gives rise to the
change in direction of vA/B.

532

Chapter 7

Introduction to Three-Dimensional Dynamics of Rigid Bodies

SAMPLE PROBLEM 7/5
z

The motor housing and its bracket rotate about the Z-axis at the constant
rate ⍀ ϭ 3 rad/s. The motor shaft and disk have a constant angular velocity of
spin p ϭ 8 rad/s with respect to the motor housing in the direction shown. If ␥ is
constant at 30Њ, determine the velocity and acceleration of point A at the top of
the disk and the angular acceleration ␣ of the disk.

Z
350
mm

The rotating reference axes x-y-z are attached to the motor housing,
and the rotating base for the motor has the momentary orientation shown with
ᕡ respect to the ﬁxed axes X-Y-Z. We will use both X-Y-Z components with unit
vectors I, J, K and x-y-z components with unit vectors i, j, k. The angular velocity of the x-y-z axes becomes ⍀ ϭ ⍀K ϭ 3K rad/s.

Velocity.

The velocity of A is given by the ﬁrst of Eqs. 7/6

y
B

γ

x
Ω

Y

Helpful Hints

ᕡ This choice for the reference axes

vA ϭ vB ϩ ⍀ ؋ rA/B ϩ vrel

provides a simple description for the
motion of the disk relative to these
axes.

where
vB ϭ ⍀ ؋ rB ϭ 3K ؋ 0.350J ϭ Ϫ1.05I ϭ Ϫ1.05i m/s

ᕢ

120 mm

A

p
X

Solution.

300
mm

⍀ ؋ rA/B ϭ 3K ؋ (0.300j ϩ 0.120k)

ᕢ Note that K ؋ i ϭ J ϭ j cos ␥ Ϫ

ϭ (Ϫ0.9 cos 30Њ)i ϩ (0.36 sin 30Њ)i ϭ Ϫ0.599i m/s

k sin ␥, K ؋ j ϭ Ϫi cos ␥, and
K ؋ k ϭ i sin ␥.

vrel ϭ p ؋ rA/B ϭ 8j ؋ (0.300j ϩ 0.120k) ϭ 0.960i m/s
Thus,
vA ϭ Ϫ1.05i Ϫ 0.599i ϩ 0.960i ϭ Ϫ0.689i m/s

Acceleration.

Ans.

The acceleration of A is given by the second of Eqs. 7/6

˙
aA ϭ aB ϩ ⍀ ؋ rA/B ϩ ⍀ ؋ (⍀ ؋ rA/B) ϩ 2⍀ ؋ vrel ϩ arel
where
aB ϭ ⍀ ؋ (⍀ ؋ rB) ϭ 3K ؋ (3K ؋ 0.350J) ϭ Ϫ3.15J
ϭ 3.15(Ϫj cos 30Њ ϩ k sin 30Њ) ϭ Ϫ2.73j ϩ 1.575k m/s2

˙
⍀ϭ0
ᕢ

⍀ ؋ (⍀ ؋ rA/B) ϭ 3K ؋ [3K ؋ (0.300j ϩ 0.120k)]
ϭ 3K ؋ (Ϫ0.599i) ϭ Ϫ1.557j ϩ 0.899k m/s2
2⍀ ؋ vrel ϭ 2(3K) ؋ 0.960i ϭ 5.76J
ϭ 5.76(j cos 30Њ Ϫ k sin 30Њ) ϭ 4.99j Ϫ 2.88k m/s2
arel ϭ p ؋ (p ؋ rA/B) ϭ 8j ؋ [8j ؋ (0.300j ϩ 0.120k)]
ϭ Ϫ7.68k m/s2
Substituting into the expression for aA and collecting terms give us
aA ϭ 0.703j Ϫ 8.09k m/s2
and

aA ϭ Ί(0.703)2 ϩ (8.09)2 ϭ 8.12 m/s2

Angular Acceleration.

Ans.

Since the precession is steady, we may use Eq. 7/3

to give us
␣ ϭ ␻ ϭ ⍀ ؋ ␻ ϭ 3K ؋ (3K ϩ 8j)
˙
ϭ 0 ϩ (Ϫ24 cos 30Њ)i ϭ Ϫ20.8i rad/s2

Ans.

150
mm

Article 7/6

PROBLEMS

y

ω

z

533

400
mm

Introductory Problems
7/29 The solid cylinder has a body cone with a semivertex angle of 20Њ. Momentarily the angular velocity ␻ has a magnitude of 30 rad/s and lies in the y-z
plane. Determine the rate p at which the cylinder is
spinning about its z-axis and write the vector expression for the velocity of B with respect to A.

Problems

A
300
mm

O

Ω = 4 rad/s

C

z

20°

x0
x
p = 10 rad/s
Problem 7/31

7/32 If the angular rate p of the disk in Prob. 7/31 is increasing at the rate of 6 rad/s per second and if ⍀ remains constant at 4 rad/s, determine the angular
acceleration ␣ of the disk at the instant when p
reaches 10 rad/s.

B
y
0.4 m
A

7/33 For the conditions of Prob. 7/31, determine the velocity vA and acceleration aA of point A on the disk
as it passes the position shown. Reference axes x-y-z
are attached to the collar at O and its shaft OC.

x
Problem 7/29

7/30 The helicopter is nosing over at the constant rate
q rad/s. If the rotor blades revolve at the constant
speed p rad/s, write the expression for the angular
acceleration ␣ of the rotor. Take the y-axis to be
attached to the fuselage and pointing forward perpendicular to the rotor axis.
z

7/34 An unmanned radar-radio controlled aircraft with
tilt-rotor propulsion is being designed for reconnaissance purposes. Vertical rise begins with ␪ ϭ 0 and is
followed by horizontal ﬂight as ␪ approaches 90Њ. If
the rotors turn at a constant speed N of 360 rev/min,
determine the angular acceleration ␣ of rotor A for
˙
␪ ϭ 30Њ if ␪ is constant at 0.2 rad/s.
θ

p
N

y

θ

q

z
y

N
Problem 7/30
x

7/31 The collar at O and attached shaft OC rotate about
the ﬁxed x0-axis at the constant rate ⍀ ϭ 4 rad/s.
Simultaneously, the circular disk rotates about OC
at the constant rate p ϭ 10 rad/s. Determine the
magnitude of the total angular velocity ␻ of the disk
and ﬁnd its angular acceleration ␣.

A

Problem 7/34

534

Chapter 7

Introduction to Three-Dimensional Dynamics of Rigid Bodies

7/35 End A of the rigid link is confined to move in the
Ϫx-direction while end B is conﬁned to move along
the z-axis. Determine the component ␻n normal to
AB of the angular velocity of the link as it passes the
position shown with vA ϭ 3 ft/sec.

z
Z
A
R

Ω

b

β

z

p

M

B
O
y

x
Problem 7/36
7′

O

vA
x

3′

2′

y

A
Problem 7/35

Representative Problems
7/36 The small motor M is pivoted about the x-axis through
O and gives its shaft OA a constant speed p rad/s in
the direction shown relative to its housing. The entire
unit is then set into rotation about the vertical Z-axis
at the constant angular velocity ⍀ rad/s. Simultaneously, the motor pivots about the x-axis at the con˙
stant rate ␤ for an interval of motion. Determine the
angular acceleration ␣ of the shaft OA in terms of ␤.
Express your result in terms of the unit vectors for the
rotating x-y-z axes.

7/37 The ﬂight simulator is mounted on six hydraulic actuators connected in pairs to their attachment points
on the underside of the simulator. By programming
the actions of the actuators, a variety of ﬂight conditions can be simulated with translational and rotational displacements through a limited range of
motion. Axes x-y-z are attached to the simulator with
origin B at the center of the volume. For the instant
represented, B has a velocity and an acceleration in
the horizontal y-direction of 3.2 ft/sec and 4 ft/sec2,
respectively. Simultaneously, the angular velocities
and their time rates of change are ␻x ϭ 1.4 rad/sec,
␻x ϭ 2 rad/sec2, ␻y ϭ 1.2 rad/sec, ␻y ϭ 3 rad/sec2,
˙
˙
␻z ϭ ␻z ϭ 0. For this instant determine the magni˙
tudes of the velocity and acceleration of point A.
z

y
60″

ωy
B
A

ωx

Problem 7/37

x

Article 7/6
7/38 The robot of Prob. 7/16 is shown again here, where
the coordinate system x-y-z with origin at O2 ro˙
tates about the X-axis at the rate ␪. Nonrotating
axes X-Y-Z oriented as shown have their origin at
˙
O1. If ␻2 ϭ ␪ ϭ 3 rad/s constant, ␻3 ϭ 1.5 rad/s constant, ␻1 ϭ ␻5 ϭ 0, O1O2 ϭ 1.2 m, and O2 A ϭ 0.6 m,
determine the velocity of the center A of the jaws
for the instant when ␪ ϭ 60Њ. The angle ␤ lies in the
y-z plane and is constant at 45Њ.

Problems

535

Z
Y
A
0.6 m
z
Y

L

z
ω3

Z

y

B

ω4

O2

ω1

β

A
ω5

X
vB

x

x
X

θ

Problem 7/39

O1
y

ω2

Y

X

7/40 The spacecraft is revolving about its z-axis, which
has a fixed space orientation, at the constant rate
1
p ϭ 10 rad/s. Simultaneously, its solar panels are
˙
unfolding at the rate ␤ which is programmed to
vary with ␤ as shown in the graph. Determine the
angular acceleration ␣ of panel A an instant (a) before and an instant (b) after it reaches the position
␤ ϭ 18Њ.

Problem 7/38
z
p

7/39 For the instant represented collar B is moving
along the fixed shaft in the X-direction with a constant velocity vB ϭ 4 m/s. Also at this instant X ϭ
0.3 m and Y ϭ 0.2 m. Calculate the velocity of collar A,
which moves along the fixed shaft parallel to the
Y-axis. Solve, first, by differentiating the relation
X 2 ϩ Y 2 ϩ Z2 ϭ L2 with respect to time and, second, by using the first of Eqs. 7/4 with translating
axes attached to B. Each clevis is free to rotate
about the axis of the rod.

β

A

β

y

x
2
·
β
( °/s)
0
0

18

90
β (°)

Problem 7/40

536

Chapter 7

Introduction to Three-Dimensional Dynamics of Rigid Bodies

7/41 The disk has a constant angular velocity p about its
z-axis, and the yoke A has a constant angular velocity ␻2 about its shaft as shown. Simultaneously, the
entire assembly revolves about the ﬁxed X-axis with
a constant angular velocity ␻1. Determine the expression for the angular acceleration of the disk as
the yoke brings it into the vertical plane in the
position shown. Solve by picturing the vector
changes in the angular-velocity components.

7/43 The circular disk of 100-mm radius rotates about its
z-axis at the constant speed p ϭ 240 rev/min, and
arm OCB rotates about the Y-axis at the constant
speed N ϭ 30 rev/min. Determine the velocity v and
acceleration a of point A on the disk as it passes the
position shown. Use reference axes x-y-z attached to
the arm OCB.
z
180 m
m
y
100 mm

p

x

B

A

D

x

100 mm

p

Y
Z

X

C

O
X

z
y

N
A
Problem 7/43

ω1

7/44 Solve Prob. 7/43 by attaching the reference axes x-y-z
to the rotating disk.

ω2

Z

Y
Problem 7/41

7/42 The collar and clevis A are given a constant upward
velocity of 8 in./sec for an interval of motion and
cause the ball end of the bar to slide in the radial slot
in the rotating disk. Determine the angular acceleration of the bar when the bar passes the position for
which z ϭ 3 in. The disk turns at the constant rate
of 2 rad/sec.

7/45 For the conditions described in Prob. 7/36, determine the velocity v and acceleration a of the center
A of the ball tool in terms of ␤.
7/46 The circular disk is spinning about its own axis
( y-axis) at the constant rate p ϭ 10␲ rad/s. Simultaneously, the frame is rotating about the Z-axis at the
constant rate ⍀ ϭ 4␲ rad/s. Calculate the angular
acceleration ␣ of the disk and the acceleration of
point A at the top of the disk. Axes x-y-z are attached
to the frame, which has the momentary orientation
shown with respect to the ﬁxed axes X-Y-Z.

z
Z

z

A

l = 5′′
B

Ω = 2 rad/sec

100
mm

p
y

x

300 mm

z

A

O

Ω

B
y

x

Y
Problem 7/42
X
Problem 7/46

Article 7/6
7/47 The center O of the spacecraft is moving through
space with a constant velocity. During the period of
motion prior to stabilization, the spacecraft has a
constant rotational rate ⍀ ϭ 1 rad/sec about its
2
z-axis. The x-y-z axes are attached to the body of the
craft, and the solar panels rotate about the y-axis at
˙ 4
the constant rate ␪ ϭ 1 rad/sec with respect to the
spacecraft. If ␻ is the absolute angular velocity of
the solar panels, determine ␻. Also ﬁnd the accelera˙
tion of point A when ␪ ϭ 30Њ.

Problems

537

y
b

Y

A

ω2

r

x X

ω1
B

z

O

z

p

Z
Ω

θ

Problem 7/48
A
O

2′
2′

y

x
8′

Problem 7/47

7/48 The thin circular disk of mass m and radius r is rotating about its z-axis with a constant angular velocity p, and the yoke in which it is mounted rotates
about the X-axis through OB with a constant angular velocity ␻1. Simultaneously, the entire assembly
rotates about the ﬁxed Y-axis through O with a constant angular velocity ␻2. Determine the velocity v
and acceleration a of point A on the rim of the disk
as it passes the position shown where the x-y plane
of the disk coincides with the X-Y plane. The x-y-z
axes are attached to the yoke.

᭤ 7/49 For the conditions speciﬁed with Sample Problem
7/2, except that ␥ is increasing at the steady rate of
3␲ rad/sec, determine the angular velocity ␻ and the
angular acceleration ␣ of the rotor when the position
␥ ϭ 30Њ is passed. (Suggestion: Apply Eq. 7/7 to the
vector ␻ to ﬁnd ␣. Note that ⍀ in Sample Problem
7/2 is no longer the complete angular velocity of the
axes.)
᭤7/50 The wheel of radius r is free to rotate about the bent
axle CO which turns about the vertical axis at the
constant rate p rad/s. If the wheel rolls without slipping on the horizontal circle of radius R, determine
the expressions for the angular velocity ␻ and angular acceleration ␣ of the wheel. The x-axis is always
horizontal.
y

z
θ

O

C
r

M
p
B

Problem 7/50

A
R

x

538

Chapter 7

Introduction to Three-Dimensional Dynamics of Rigid Bodies

᭤ 7/51 The gyro rotor shown is spinning at the constant
rate of 100 rev/min relative to the x-y-z axes in the
direction indicated. If the angle ␥ between the gimbal ring and the horizontal X-Y plane is made to increase at the constant rate of 4 rad/s and if the unit
is forced to precess about the vertical at the constant
rate N ϭ 20 rev/min, calculate the magnitude of the
angular acceleration ␣ of the rotor when ␥ ϭ 30Њ.
Solve by using Eq. 7/7 applied to the angular velocity
of the rotor.

Z
z

B
x
y

700 m
m

Z y

O
z

O
γ

X

y

A

X
x

vA
Y

N

Problem 7/51

᭤ 7/52 For a short interval of motion, collar A moves
along its ﬁxed shaft with a velocity vA ϭ 2 m/s in the
Y-direction. Collar B, in turn, slides along its fixed
vertical shaft. Link AB is 700 mm in length and
can turn within the clevis at A to allow for the angular change between the clevises. For the instant
when A passes the position where y ϭ 200 mm, determine the velocity of collar B using nonrotating
axes attached to B and find the component ␻n, normal to AB, of the angular velocity of the link. Also
solve for vB by differentiating the appropriate relation x2 ϩ y2 ϩ z2 ϭ l2.

Problem 7/52

300 mm

Y

Article 7/7

SECTION B
7/7

Angular Momentum

539

KINETICS

Angular Momentum

The force equation for a mass system, rigid or nonrigid, Eq. 4/1 or
4/6, is the generalization of Newton’s second law for the motion of a particle and should require no further explanation. The moment equation
for three-dimensional motion, however, is not nearly as simple as the
third of Eqs. 6/1 for plane motion since the change of angular momentum has a number of additional components which are absent in plane
motion.
We now consider a rigid body moving with any general motion in
space, Fig. 7/12a. Axes x-y-z are attached to the body with origin at the
mass center G. Thus, the angular velocity ␻ of the body becomes the angular velocity of the x-y-z axes as observed from the ﬁxed reference axes
X-Y-Z. The absolute angular momentum HG of the body about its mass
center G is the sum of the moments about G of the linear momenta of all
elements of the body and was expressed in Art. 4/4 as HG ϭ Σ(␳i ؋ mivi),
where vi is the absolute velocity of the mass element mi.
But for the rigid body, vi ϭ v ϩ ␻ ؋ ␳i, where ␻ ؋ ␳i is the relative
velocity of mi with respect to G as seen from nonrotating axes. Thus, we
may write

z

ω
mi
y

ρi

Z
G

x

Y
X
(a)

HG ϭ Ϫv ؋ Σmi ␳i ϩ Σ[ ␳i ؋ mi(␻ ؋ ␳i)]
where we have factored out v from the ﬁrst summation terms by reversing the order of the cross product and changing the sign. With the origin
at the mass center G, the ﬁrst term in HG is zero since Σmi ␳i ϭ m␳ ϭ 0.
The second term with the substitution of dm for mi and ␳ for ␳i gives
HG ϭ

͵ [␳ ؋ (␻ ؋ ␳)] dm

͵ [r ؋ (␻ ؋ r)] dm

ω
z
mi

(7/9)

Moments and Products of Inertia
We observe now that for the two cases of Figs. 7/12a and 7/12b, the
position vectors ␳i and ri are given by the same expression xi ϩ yj ϩ zk.
Thus, Eqs. 7/8 and 7/9 are identical in form, and the symbol H will be
used here for either case. We now carry out the expansion of the integrand in the two expressions for angular momentum, recognizing that
the components of ␻ are invariant with respect to the integrals over the
body and thus become constant multipliers of the integrals. The cross-product

y

Z
ri

(7/8)

Before expanding the integrand of Eq. 7/8, we consider also the case
of a rigid body rotating about a ﬁxed point O, Fig. 7/12b. The x-y-z axes
are attached to the body, and both body and axes have an angular velocity ␻. The angular momentum about O was expressed in Art. 4/4 and is
HO ϭ Σ(ri ؋ mivi), where, for the rigid body, vi ϭ ␻ ؋ ri. Thus, with the
substitution of dm for mi and r for ri, the angular momentum is
HO ϭ

–
v

Y

O
x
X
(b)

Figure 7/12

540

Chapter 7

Introduction to Three-Dimensional Dynamics of Rigid Bodies

expansion applied to the triple vector product gives, upon collection of
terms,
dH ϭ i[(y2 ϩ z2)␻x

Ϫxy␻y

Ϫxz␻z] dm

Ϫyx␻x ϩ (z2 ϩ x2)␻y

ϩj[
ϩk[

Ϫzx␻x

Ϫyz␻z] dm

Ϫzy␻y ϩ (x ϩ y2)␻z] dm
2

Now let

͵ (y ϩ z ) dm
ϭ ͵ (z ϩ x ) dm
ϭ ͵ (x ϩ y ) dm

͵ xy dm
ϭ ͵ xz dm
ϭ ͵ yz dm

Ixx ϭ

2

2

Ixy ϭ

Iyy

2

2

Ixz

2

2

Iyz

Izz

(7/10)

The quantities Ixx, Iyy, Izz are called the moments of inertia of the
body about the respective axes, and Ixy, Ixz, Iyz are the products of inertia
with respect to the coordinate axes. These quantities describe the manner in which the mass of a rigid body is distributed with respect to the
chosen axes. The calculation of moments and products of inertia is explained fully in Appendix B. The double subscripts for the moments and
products of inertia preserve a symmetry of notation which has special
meaning in their description by tensor notation.*
Observe that Ixy ϭ Iyx, Ixz ϭ Izx, and Iyz ϭ Izy. With the substitutions
of Eqs. 7/10, the expression for H becomes
( Ixx␻x Ϫ Ixy␻y Ϫ Ixz␻z)i

Hϭ

ϩ(ϪIyx␻x ϩ Iyy␻y Ϫ Iyz␻z)j

(7/11)

ϩ(ϪIzx␻x Ϫ Izy␻y ϩ Izz␻z)k
and the components of H are clearly
Hx ϭ

Ixx␻x Ϫ Ixy␻y Ϫ Ixz␻z

Hy ϭ ϪIyx␻x ϩ Iyy␻y Ϫ Iyz␻z

(7/12)

Hz ϭ ϪIzx␻x Ϫ Izy␻y ϩ Izz␻z
Equation 7/11 is the general expression for the angular momentum either about the mass center G or about a ﬁxed point O for a rigid body
rotating with an instantaneous angular velocity ␻.
Remember that in each of the two cases represented, the reference
axes x-y-z are attached to the rigid body. This attachment makes the
*See, for example, the ﬁrst author’s Dynamics, 2nd Edition, SI Version, 1975, John Wiley &
Sons, Art. 41.

Article 7/7

moment-of-inertia integrals and the product-of-inertia integrals of Eqs.
7/10 invariant with time. If the x-y-z axes were to rotate with respect to
an irregular body, then these inertia integrals would be functions of the
time, which would introduce an undesirable complexity into the angularmomentum relations. An important exception occurs when a rigid body
is spinning about an axis of symmetry, in which case, the inertia integrals are not affected by the angular position of the body about its spin
axis. Thus, for a body rotating about an axis of symmetry, it is frequently
convenient to choose one axis of the reference system to coincide with
the axis of rotation and allow the other two axes not to turn with the
body. In addition to the momentum components due to the angular velocity ⍀ of the reference axes, then, an added angular-momentum component along the spin axis due to the relative spin about the axis would
have to be accounted for.

Principal Axes
The array of moments and products of inertia

which appear in Eq. 7/12 is called the inertia matrix or inertia tensor. As
we change the orientation of the axes relative to the body, the moments
and products of inertia will also change in value. It can be shown* that
there is one unique orientation of axes x-y-z for a given origin for which
the products of inertia vanish and the moments of inertia Ixx, Iyy, Izz take
on stationary values. For this orientation, the inertia matrix takes the
form

and is said to be diagonalized. The axes x-y-z for which the products of
inertia vanish are called the principal axes of inertia, and Ixx, Iyy, and Izz
are called the principal moments of inertia. The principal moments of
inertia for a given origin represent the maximum, the minimum, and an
intermediate value of the moments of inertia.
If the coordinate axes coincide with the principal axes of inertia, Eq.
7/11 for the angular momentum about the mass center or about a ﬁxed
point becomes
H ϭ Ixx␻xi ϩ Iyy␻y j ϩ Izz␻zk

(7/13)

It is always possible to locate the principal axes of inertia for a general three-dimensional rigid body. Thus, we can express its angular momentum by Eq. 7/13, although it may not always be convenient to do so
*See, for example, the ﬁrst author’s Dynamics, 2nd Edition, SI Version, 1975, John Wiley &
Sons, Art. 41.

Angular Momentum

541

542

Chapter 7

Introduction to Three-Dimensional Dynamics of Rigid Bodies

for geometric reasons. Except when the body rotates about one of the
principal axes of inertia or when Ixx ϭ Iyy ϭ Izz, the vectors H and ␻ have
different directions.

HG
G
r

G = mv

Transfer Principle for Angular Momentum
The momentum properties of a rigid body may be represented by
the resultant linear-momentum vector G ϭ mv through the mass center
and the resultant angular-momentum vector HG about the mass center,
as shown in Fig. 7/13. Although HG has the properties of a free vector,
we represent it through G for convenience.
These vectors have properties analogous to those of a force and a
couple. Thus, the angular momentum about any point P equals the free
vector HG plus the moment of the linear-momentum vector G about P.
Therefore, we may write
HP ϭ HG ϩ r ؋ G

P

Figure 7/13

(7/14)

This relation, which was derived previously in Chapter 4 as Eq. 4/10,
also applies to a ﬁxed point O on the body or body extended, where O
merely replaces P. Equation 7/14 constitutes a transfer theorem for angular momentum.

7/8

Kinetic Energy

In Art. 4/3 on the dynamics of systems of particles, we developed the
expression for the kinetic energy T of any general system of mass, rigid
or nonrigid, and obtained the result
T ϭ 1 mv 2 ϩ Σ 1 mi͉␳ i͉2
˙
2
2

[4/4]

where v is the velocity of the mass center and ␳i is the position vector of
a representative element of mass mi with respect to the mass center. We
identiﬁed the ﬁrst term as the kinetic energy due to the translation of
the system and the second term as the kinetic energy associated with
the motion relative to the mass center. The translational term may be
written alternatively as
1
1 ˙ ˙
1
2
2 mv ϭ 2 mr ⅐ r ϭ 2 v ⅐ G

r
where ˙ is the velocity v of the mass center and G is the linear momentum of the body.
For a rigid body, the relative term becomes the kinetic energy due
to rotation about the mass center. Because ␳ i is the velocity of the rep˙
resentative particle with respect to the mass center, then for the rigid
body we may write it as ␳ i ϭ ␻ ؋ ␳i, where ␻ is the angular velocity of
˙
the body. With this substitution, the relative term in the kinetic energy
expression becomes
1

1

Σ 2 mi͉␳ i͉2 ϭ Σ 2 mi(␻ ؋ ␳i) ⅐ (␻ ؋ ␳i)
˙

Article 7/8

Kinetic Energy

543

If we use the fact that the dot and the cross may be interchanged in
the triple scalar product, that is, P ؋ Q ⅐ R ϭ P ⅐ Q ؋ R, we may write
(␻ ؋ ␳i) ⅐ (␻ ؋ ␳i) ϭ ␻ ⅐ ␳i ؋ (␻ ؋ ␳i)
Because ␻ is the same factor in all terms of the summation, it may be
factored out to give
1

1

1

Σ 2 mi͉␳ i͉2 ϭ 2 ␻ ⅐ Σ␳i ؋ mi(␻ ؋ ␳i) ϭ 2 ␻ ⅐ HG
˙
where HG is the same as the integral expressed by Eq. 7/8. Thus, the
general expression for the kinetic energy of a rigid body moving with
mass-center velocity v and angular velocity ␻ is
1

1

T ϭ 2 v ⅐ G ϩ 2 ␻ ⅐ HG

(7/15)

Expansion of this vector equation by substitution of the expression
for HG written from Eq. 7/11 yields
1
1
T ϭ 2 mv 2 ϩ 2 (Ixx␻x2 ϩ Iyy␻y2 ϩ Izz␻z2)

Ϫ(Ixy␻x␻y ϩ Ixz␻x␻z ϩ Iyz␻y␻z)

(7/16)

If the axes coincide with the principal axes of inertia, the kinetic energy
is merely
1

1

T ϭ 2 mv 2 ϩ 2 (Ixx␻x2 ϩ Iyy␻y2 ϩ Izz␻z2)

(7/17)

T ϭ 1 ␻ ⅐ HO
2

Media Bakery

When a rigid body is pivoted about a ﬁxed point O or when there is
a point O in the body which momentarily has zero velocity, the kinetic
1
r r
energy is T ϭ Σ 2mi˙i ⅐ ˙i. This expression reduces to
(7/18)

where HO is the angular momentum about O, as may be seen by replacing ␳i in the previous derivation by ri, the position vector from O. Equations 7/15 and 7/18 are the three-dimensional counterparts of Eqs. 6/9
and 6/8 for plane motion.

Portions of the landing gear for
a large aircraft undergo threedimensional motion during retraction
and deployment.

544

Chapter 7

Introduction to Three-Dimensional Dynamics of Rigid Bodies

SAMPLE PROBLEM 7/6

z

The bent plate has a mass of 70 kg per square meter of surface area and revolves about the z-axis at the rate ␻ ϭ 30 rad/s. Determine (a) the angular momentum H of the plate about point O and (b) the kinetic energy T of the plate.
Neglect the mass of the hub and the thickness of the plate compared with its surface dimensions.

75 mm

ω

A
y

Solution.

The moments and products of inertia are written with the aid of
ᕡ Eqs. B/3 and B/9 in Appendix B by transfer from the parallel centroidal axes for
each part. First, the masses of the parts are mA ϭ (0.100)(0.125)(70) ϭ 0.875 kg
and mB ϭ (0.075)(0.150)(70) ϭ 0.788 kg.

100 mm

150 mm

B
O

Part A
[Ixx ϭ Ixx ϩ md2]

Ixx ϭ

[Iyy ϭ 1ml2]
3

Iyy ϭ

0.875
(0.100)2 ϭ 0.002 92 kg ⅐ m2
3

[Izz ϭ 1ml2]
3

Izz ϭ

125 mm

0.875
[(0.100)2 ϩ (0.125)2]
12
ϩ 0.875[(0.050)2 ϩ (0.0625)2] ϭ 0.007 47 kg ⅐ m2

0.875
(0.125)2 ϭ 0.004 56 kg ⅐ m2
3

΄I ϭ ͵ xy dm,

Ixz ϭ

xy

[Iyz ϭ Iyz ϩ mdydz]

͵ xz dm΅

Ixy ϭ 0

x

z

ω

HO

Ixz ϭ 0

Iyz ϭ 0 ϩ 0.875(0.0625)(0.050) ϭ 0.002 73

B

A

kg ⅐ m2

Part B
0.788
(0.150)2 ϩ 0.788[(0.125)2 ϩ (0.075)2]
12
ϭ 0.018 21 kg ⅐ m2

[Ixx ϭ Ixx ϩ md2]

Ixx ϭ

[Iyy ϭ Iyy ϩ md2]

Iyy ϭ

[Izz ϭ Izz ϩ md2]

Izz ϭ

O
x

0.788
[(0.075)2 ϩ (0.150)2]
12
ϩ 0.788[(0.0375)2 ϩ (0.075)2] ϭ 0.007 38 kg ⅐ m2

Helpful Hints

ᕡ The parallel-axis theorems for trans-

0.788
(0.075)2 ϩ 0.788[(0.125)2 ϩ (0.0375)2]
12
ϭ 0.013 78 kg ⅐ m2

[Ixy ϭ Ixy ϩ mdxdy]

Ixy ϭ 0 ϩ 0.788(0.0375)(0.125) ϭ 0.003 69 kg ⅐ m2

[Ixz ϭ Ixz ϩ mdxdz]

Ixz ϭ 0 ϩ 0.788(0.0375)(0.075) ϭ 0.002 21 kg ⅐ m2

[Iyz ϭ Iyz ϩ mdydz]

ferring moments and products of inertia from centroidal axes to parallel
axes are explained in Appendix B and
are most useful relations.

Iyz ϭ 0 ϩ 0.788(0.125)(0.075) ϭ 0.007 38 kg ⅐ m2

The sum of the respective inertia terms gives for the two plates together
Ixx ϭ 0.0257 kg ⅐ m2

Ixy ϭ 0.003 69 kg ⅐ m2

Iyy ϭ 0.010 30 kg ⅐ m2

Ixz ϭ 0.002 21 kg ⅐ m2

Izz ϭ 0.018 34 kg ⅐ m2

Iyz ϭ 0.010 12 kg ⅐ m2

(a) The angular momentum of the body is given by Eq. 7/11, where ␻z ϭ 30
rad/s and ␻x and ␻y are zero. Thus,

ᕢ

HO ϭ 30(Ϫ0.002 21i Ϫ 0.010 12j ϩ 0.018 34k) N ⅐ m ⅐ s

Ans.

1
1
T ϭ 2 ␻ ⅐ HO ϭ 2(30k) ⅐ 30(Ϫ0.002 21i Ϫ 0.010 12j ϩ 0.018 34k)

ϭ 8.25 J

ᕢ Recall that the units of angular momentum may also be written in the
base units as kg ⅐ m2/s.

(b) The kinetic energy from Eq. 7/18 becomes

Ans.

y

Article 7/8

PROBLEMS
Introductory Problems
7/53 The three small spheres, each of mass m, are rigidly
mounted to the horizontal shaft which rotates with
the angular velocity ␻ as shown. Neglect the radius
of each sphere compared with the other dimensions
and write expressions for the magnitudes of their
linear momentum G and their angular momentum
HO about the origin O of the coordinates.

Problems

545

7/55 The aircraft landing gear viewed from the front is
being retracted immediately after takeoff, and the
wheel is spinning at the rate corresponding to the
takeoff speed of 200 km/h. The 45-kg wheel has a radius of gyration about its z-axis of 370 mm. Neglect
the thickness of the wheel and calculate the angular
momentum of the wheel about G and about A for the
position where ␪ is increasing at the rate of 30Њ per
second.

y
b
b

920
mm

z

b

θ

G
O

A

b
x
b
215
mm

ω

x

z

Problem 7/55
Problem 7/53

7/54 The spheres of Prob. 7/53 are replaced by three rods,
each of mass m and length l, mounted at their centers to the shaft, which rotates with the angular
velocity ␻ as shown. The axes of the rods are, respectively, in the x-, y-, and z-directions, and their diameters are negligible compared with the other
dimensions. Determine the angular momentum HO
of the three rods with respect to the coordinate
origin O.

7/56 The bent rod has a mass ␳ per unit length and rotates about the z-axis with an angular velocity ␻.
Determine the angular momentum HO of the rod
about the ﬁxed origin O of the axes, which are attached to the rod. Also ﬁnd the kinetic energy T of
the rod.
b

z

b

y
b

ω

b

y

b
b
O

b

O

x
b

x

ω

z

Problem 7/54

Problem 7/56

546

Chapter 7

Introduction to Three-Dimensional Dynamics of Rigid Bodies

7/57 Use the results of Prob. 7/56 and determine the angular momentum HG of the bent rod of that problem
about its mass center G using the given reference
axes.

z
b

p

r

7/58 The slender rod of mass m and length l rotates
about the y-axis as the element of a right-circular
cone. If the angular velocity about the y-axis is ␻,
determine the expression for the angular momentum of the rod with respect to the x-y-z axes for the
particular position shown.

O
h
x

z
y
ω

O
x
Problem 7/58

Representative Problems
7/59 The solid half-circular cylinder of mass m revolves
about the z-axis with an angular velocity ␻ as shown.
Determine its angular momentum H with respect to
the x-y-z axes.
z

y

Problem 7/60

l
θ

ω

7/61 The elements of a reaction-wheel attitude-control
system for a spacecraft are shown in the ﬁgure.
Point G is the center of mass for the system of the
spacecraft and wheels, and x, y, z are principal axes
for the system. Each wheel has a mass m and a moment of inertia I about its own axis and spins with a
relative angular velocity p in the direction indicated.
The center of each wheel, which may be treated as a
thin disk, is a distance b from G. If the spacecraft
has angular velocity components ⍀x, ⍀y, and ⍀z,
determine the angular momentum HG of the three
wheels as a unit.
z

y

G

r
b

y
ω

c

x
O

x
Problem 7/59

7/60 The solid circular cylinder of mass m, radius r, and
length b revolves about its geometric axis at an angular rate p rad/s. Simultaneously, the bracket and
attached shaft revolve about the x-axis at the rate
␻ rad/s. Write the expression for the angular momentun HO of the cylinder about O with reference
axes as shown.

Problem 7/61

Article 7/8

7/64 The rectangular plate, with a mass of 3 kg and a uniform small thickness, is welded at the 45Њ angle to
the vertical shaft, which rotates with the angular
velocity of 20␲ rad/s. Determine the angular momentum H of the plate about O and ﬁnd the kinetic
energy of the plate.
z

0m

Z y

100
mm 100
mm

20

45°
y

0m

m

p

O

20
z

547

m

7/62 The gyro rotor is spinning at the constant rate p ϭ
100 rev/min relative to the x-y-z axes in the direction
indicated. If the angle ␥ between the gimbal ring and
horizontal X-Y plane is made to increase at the rate of
4 rad/sec and if the unit is forced to precess about the
vertical at the constant rate N ϭ 20 rev/min, calculate
the angular momentum HO of the rotor when ␥ ϭ 30Њ.
The axial and transverse moments of inertia are Izz ϭ
5(10Ϫ3) lb-ft-sec2 and Ixx ϭ Iyy ϭ 2.5(10Ϫ3) lb-ft-sec2.

Problems

x

O
γ

X

ω = 20π rad/s

x
Y

Problem 7/64
N

7/65 The circular disk of mass m and radius r is mounted
on the vertical shaft with an angle ␣ between its
plane and the plane of rotation of the shaft. Determine an expression for the angular momentum H of
the disk about O. Find the angle ␤ which the angular
momentum H makes with the shaft if ␣ ϭ 10Њ.

Problem 7/62

7/63 The slender steel rod AB weighs 6.20 lb and is secured
to the rotating shaft by the rod OG and its ﬁttings at
O and G. The angle ␤ remains constant at 30Њ, and
the entire rigid assembly rotates about the z-axis at
the steady rate N ϭ 600 rev/min. Calculate the angular momentum HO of AB and its kinetic energy T.

x

O

α
ω

y

y

B

16″

N

r

β

O

z
14″

G

z

x
14″

A
Problem 7/63

Problem 7/65

x′

548

Chapter 7

Introduction to Three-Dimensional Dynamics of Rigid Bodies

7/66 The right-circular cone of height h and base radius r
spins about its axis of symmetry with an angular
rate p. Simultaneously, the entire cone revolves
about the x-axis with angular rate ⍀. Determine the
angular momentum HO of the cone about the origin
O of the x-y-z axes and the kinetic energy T for the
position shown. The mass of the cone is m.
z
p

7/68 The spacecraft shown has a mass m with mass center
G. Its radius of gyration about its z-axis of rotational
symmetry is k and that about either the x- or y-axis is
kЈ. In space, the spacecraft spins within its x-y-z
˙
reference frame at the rate p ϭ ␾ . Simultaneously, a
point C on the z-axis moves in a circle about the z0-axis
with a frequency ƒ (rotations per unit time). The
z0-axis has a constant direction in space. Determine
the angular momentum HG of the spacecraft relative
to the axes designated. Note that the x-axis always
lies in the z-z0 plane and that the y-axis is therefore
normal to z0.

r

z0

z

C

h

Ω

x

G

O
y
φ

x
Problem 7/66

7/67 Each of the slender rods of length l and mass m is
welded to the circular disk which rotates about the
vertical z-axis with an angular velocity ␻. Each rod
makes an angle ␤ with the vertical and lies in a
plane parallel to the y-z plane. Determine an expression for the angular momentum HO of the two rods
about the origin O of the axes.

z

y

Problem 7/68

7/69 The uniform circular disk of Prob. 7/48 with the
three components of angular velocity is shown again
here. Determine the kinetic energy T and the angular momentum HO with respect to O of the disk for
the instant represented, when the x-y plane coincides with the X-Y plane. The mass of the disk is m.
y

b
β

b

l

β

A

ω2

O

r

x X

ω1

y
x

b

Y
l

B

ω

z

O
Z

Problem 7/66
Problem 7/69

p

Article 7/8

Problems

z

7/70 The 4-in.-radius wheel weighs 6 lb and turns about
its yЈ-axis with an angular velocity p ϭ 40␲ rad/sec
in the direction shown. Simultaneously, the fork rotates about its x-axis shaft with an angular velocity
␻ ϭ 10␲ rad/sec as indicated. Calculate the angular
momentum of the wheel about its center OЈ. Also
compute the kinetic energy of the wheel.

b
b
c
m
m

z′

O
r

p = 40π rad /sec

549

c

ω

x

y

β

4″
O′
x′

Problem 7/71

y′
z
10″
O

x

ω = 10 π rad /sec

y

7/72 In a test of the solar panels for a spacecraft, the
model shown is rotated about the vertical axis at the
angular rate ␻. If the mass per unit area of panel is
␳, write the expression for the angular momentum
HO of the assembly about the axes shown in terms of ␪.
Also determine the maximum, minimum, and intermediate values of the moment of inertia about the
axes through O.

Problem 7/70

7/71 The assembly, consisting of the solid sphere of mass
m and the uniform rod of length 2c and equal mass
m, revolves about the vertical z-axis with an angular
velocity ␻. The rod of length 2c has a diameter which
is small compared with its length and is perpendicular to the horizontal rod to which it is welded with
the inclination ␤ shown. Determine the combined angular momentum HO of the sphere and inclined rod.

z
c

θ

b

c

θ

ω

b

a

a

b

O
y
b

x

Problem 7/72

550

Chapter 7

Introduction to Three-Dimensional Dynamics of Rigid Bodies

7/9

Momentum and Energy Equations of Motion

With the description of angular momentum, inertial properties, and
kinetic energy of a rigid body established in the previous two articles,
we are ready to apply the general momentum and energy equations of
motion.

Momentum Equations
In Art. 4/4 of Chapter 4, we established the general linear- and
angular-momentum equations for a system of constant mass. These
equations are

˙
ΣF ϭ G

[4/6]

˙
ΣM ϭ H

[4/7] or [4/9]

The general moment relation, Eq. 4/7 or 4/9, is expressed here by the
˙
single equation ΣM ϭ H, where the terms are taken either about a ﬁxed
point O or about the mass center G. In the derivation of the moment
principle, the derivative of H was taken with respect to an absolute coordinate system. When H is expressed in terms of components measured
relative to a moving coordinate system x-y-z which has an angular velocity ⍀, then by Eq. 7/7 the moment relation becomes

ΣM ϭ

΂dH΃
dt

xyz

ϩ⍀؋H

˙
˙
˙
ϭ (Hxi ϩ Hy j ϩ Hzk) ϩ ⍀ ؋ H
˙
The terms in parentheses represent that part of H due to the change in
magnitude of the components of H, and the cross-product term represents that part due to the changes in direction of the components of H.
Expansion of the cross product and rearrangement of terms give
˙
ΣM ϭ (Hx Ϫ Hy⍀z ϩ Hz⍀y)i
˙
ϩ (Hy Ϫ Hz⍀x ϩ Hx⍀z)j

(7/19)

˙
ϩ (Hz Ϫ Hx⍀y ϩ Hy⍀x)k
Equation 7/19 is the most general form of the moment equation
about a ﬁxed point O or about the mass center G. The ⍀’s are the angular velocity components of rotation of the reference axes, and the Hcomponents in the case of a rigid body are as deﬁned in Eq. 7/12, where
the ␻’s are the components of the angular velocity of the body.
We now apply Eq. 7/19 to a rigid body where the coordinate axes are
attached to the body. Under these conditions, when expressed in the x-y-z
coordinates, the moments and products of inertia are invariant with time,

Article 7/9

Momentum and Energy Equations of Motion

and ⍀ ϭ ␻. Thus, for axes attached to the body, the three scalar components of Eq. 7/19 become

˙
ΣMx ϭ Hx Ϫ Hy␻z ϩ Hz␻y
˙
ΣMy ϭ Hy Ϫ Hz␻x ϩ Hx␻z

(7/20)

˙
ΣMz ϭ Hz Ϫ Hx␻y ϩ Hy␻x
Equations 7/20 are the general moment equations for rigid-body motion
with axes attached to the body. They hold with respect to axes through a
ﬁxed point O or through the mass center G.

KEY CONCEPTS
In Art. 7/7 it was mentioned that, in general, for any origin ﬁxed to
a rigid body, there are three principal axes of inertia with respect to
which the products of inertia vanish. If the reference axes coincide with
the principal axes of inertia with origin at the mass center G or at a
point O ﬁxed to the body and ﬁxed in space, the factors Ixy, Iyz, Ixz will be
zero, and Eqs. 7/20 become
ΣMx ϭ Ixx␻x Ϫ (Iyy Ϫ Izz)␻y␻z
˙
ΣMy ϭ Iyy␻y Ϫ (Izz Ϫ Ixx)␻z␻x
˙

(7/21)

ΣMz ϭ Izz␻z Ϫ (Ixx Ϫ Iyy)␻x␻y
˙
These relations, known as Euler’s equations,* are extremely useful in
the study of rigid-body motion.

Energy Equations
The resultant of all external forces acting on a rigid body may be replaced by the resultant force ΣF acting through the mass center and a
resultant couple ΣMG acting about the mass center. Work is done by the
resultant force and the resultant couple at the respective rates ΣF ⅐ v
and ΣMG ⅐ ␻, where v is the linear velocity of the mass center and ␻ is
the angular velocity of the body. Integration over the time from condition 1 to condition 2 gives the total work done during the time interval.
Equating the works done to the respective changes in kinetic energy as
expressed in Eq. 7/15 gives
(7/22)
These equations express the change in translational kinetic energy and
the change in rotational kinetic energy, respectively, for the interval
during which ΣF or ΣMG acts, and the sum of the two expressions
equals ⌬T.
*Named after Leonhard Euler (1707–1783), a Swiss mathematician.

551

552

Chapter 7

Introduction to Three-Dimensional Dynamics of Rigid Bodies

The work-energy relationship, developed in Chapter 4 for a general
system of particles and given by
UЈ ϭ ⌬T ϩ ⌬V
1-2

[4/3]

was used in Chapter 6 for rigid bodies in plane motion. The equation
is equally applicable to rigid-body motion in three dimensions. As we
have seen previously, the work-energy approach is of great advantage
when we analyze the initial and final end-point conditions of motion.
Here the work UЈ done during the interval by all active forces exter1-2
nal to the body or system is equated to the sum of the corresponding
changes in kinetic energy ⌬T and potential energy ⌬V. The potentialenergy change is determined in the usual way, as described previously
in Art. 3/7.
We will limit our application of the equations developed in this article to two problems of special interest, parallel-plane motion and gyroscopic motion, discussed in the next two articles.

7/10

Parallel-Plane Motion

When all particles of a rigid body move in planes which are parallel
to a ﬁxed plane, the body has a general form of plane motion, as described in Art. 7/4 and pictured in Fig. 7/3. Every line in such a body
which is normal to the ﬁxed plane remains parallel to itself at all times.
We take the mass center G as the origin of coordinates x-y-z which are
attached to the body, with the x-y plane coinciding with the plane of motion P. The components of the angular velocity of both the body and the
0. For this case, the angularattached axes become ␻x ϭ ␻y ϭ 0, ␻z
momentum components from Eq. 7/12 become
Hx ϭ ϪIxz␻z

Hy ϭ ϪIyz␻z

Hz ϭ Izz␻z

and the moment relations of Eqs. 7/20 reduce to
ΣMx ϭ ϪIxz␻z ϩ Iyz␻z2
˙
ΣMy ϭ ϪIyz␻z Ϫ Ixz␻z2
˙

(7/23)

ΣMz ϭ Izz␻z
˙
We see that the third moment equation is equivalent to the second of
Eqs. 6/1, where the z-axis passes through the mass center, or to Eq. 6/4
if the z-axis passes through a ﬁxed point O.
Equations 7/23 hold for an origin of coordinates at the mass center,
as shown in Fig. 7/3, or for any origin on a ﬁxed axis of rotation. The
three independent force equations of motion which also apply to parallelplane motion are clearly
ΣFx ϭ max

ΣFy ϭ may

ΣFz ϭ 0

Equations 7/23 ﬁnd special use in describing the effect of dynamic
imbalance in rotating machinery and in rolling bodies.

Article 7/10

Parallel-Plane Motion

SAMPLE PROBLEM 7/7

553

y

The two circular disks, each of mass m1, are connected by the curved bar
bent into quarter-circular arcs and welded to the disks. The bar has a mass m2.
The total mass of the assembly is m ϭ 2m1 ϩ m2. If the disks roll without slipping on a horizontal plane with a constant velocity v of the disk centers, determine the value of the friction force under each disk at the instant represented
when the plane of the curved bar is horizontal.

x
r
r
G
r
v

z

B

r
A

Solution.

The motion is identiﬁed as parallel-plane motion since the planes of
motion of all parts of the system are parallel. The free-body diagram shows the
normal forces and friction forces at A and B and the total weight mg acting
through the mass center G, which we take as the origin of coordinates which rotate with the body.
We now apply Eqs. 7/23, where Iyz ϭ 0 and ␻z ϭ 0. The moment equation
˙
about the y-axis requires determination of Ixz. From the diagram showing the
geometry of the curved rod and with ␳ standing for the mass of the rod per unit
length, we have

ᕡ

΄

Ixy ϭ

͵ xz dm΅

͵
ϩ͵

Ixz ϭ

␲/2

0

x

G
z

B

FB
mg

(r sin ␪)(Ϫr ϩ r cos ␪)␳r d␪

␲/2

0

y

NB

FA

(Ϫr sin ␪)(r Ϫ r cos ␪)␳r d␪

Evaluating the integrals gives

θ

m2r2
Ixz ϭ Ϫ␳r3/2 Ϫ ␳r3/2 ϭ Ϫ␳r3 ϭ Ϫ
␲

΂

FAr ϩ FBr ϭ Ϫ Ϫ
FA ϩ FB ϭ

r

΃

m2r2 v2
␲
r2

m2v2
␲r

x

θ

Helpful Hints

FA Ϫ F B ϭ 0

ᕡ We must be very careful to observe

FA ϭ FB

the correct sign for each of the coordinates of the mass element dm
which make up the product xz.

Thus,
FA ϭ FB ϭ

m2v2
2␲r

Ans.

We also note for the given position that with Iyz ϭ 0 and ␻z ϭ 0, the moment
˙
equation about the x-axis gives

ᕢ [ΣMx ϭ 0]

r

z

But with v ϭ v constant, ax ϭ 0 so that
[ΣFx ϭ 0]

NA

dm
G

The second of Eqs. 7/23 with ␻z ϭ v/r and ␻z ϭ 0 gives
˙
[ΣMy ϭ ϪIxz␻z2]

A

ϪNAr ϩ NBr ϭ 0

NA ϭ NB ϭ mg/2

ᕢ When the plane of the curved bar is
not horizontal, the normal forces
under the disks are no longer equal.

554

Chapter 7

Introduction to Three-Dimensional Dynamics of Rigid Bodies

PROBLEMS
Introductory Problems
7/73 Each of the two rods of mass m is welded to the face
of the disk, which rotates about the vertical axis
with a constant angular velocity ␻. Determine the
bending moment M acting on each rod at its base.

7/75 The uniform slender bar of length l and mass m is
welded to the shaft, which rotates in bearings A and
B with a constant angular velocity ␻. Determine the
expression for the force supported by the bearing at
B as a function of ␪. Consider only the force due to
the dynamic imbalance and assume that the bearings can support radial forces only.

θ

l

x

l
l
b

b

A

ω

O

B

b
ω

c

y

z
Problem 7/75

Problem 7/73

7/74 The slender shaft carries two offset particles, each of
mass m, and rotates about the z-axis with the constant angular rate ␻ as indicated. Determine the
x- and y-components of the bearing reactions at A
and B due to the dynamic imbalance of the shaft for
the position shown.
x

7/76 If a torque M ϭ Mk is applied to the shaft in Prob.
7/75, determine the x- and y-components of the force
supported by the bearing B as the bar and shaft
start from rest in the position shown. Neglect the
mass of the shaft and consider dynamic forces only.
7/77 The paint stirrer shown in the ﬁgure is made from a
rod of length 7b and mass ␳ per unit length. Before
immersion in the paint, the stirrer is rotating freely
at a constant high angular velocity ␻ about its z-axis.
Determine the bending moment M in the rod at the
base O of the chuck.
z

A

O

ω
y

L
—
3
L
—
3

ω
R

R

m

y

m
B
L
—
3

O

b
x

z
b

Problem 7/74

b

b

b

Problem 7/77

Article 7/10
7/78 The 6-kg circular disk and attached shaft rotate at a
constant speed ␻ ϭ 10 000 rev/min. If the center of
mass of the disk is 0.05 mm off center, determine the
magnitudes of the horizontal forces A and B supported by the bearings because of the rotational imbalance.

Problems

555

7/81 The large satellite-tracking antenna has a moment
of inertia I about its z-axis of symmetry and a moment of inertia IO about each of the x- and y-axes.
Determine the angular acceleration ␣ of the antenna
about the vertical Z-axis caused by a torque M applied about Z by the drive mechanism for a given orientation ␪.

ω

Z

x

α
θ

150 mm

z

A

200 mm
B
M

y

Problem 7/78

Representative Problems
7/79 Determine the bending moment M at the tangency
point A in the semicircular rod of radius r and mass
m as it rotates about the tangent axis with a constant and large angular velocity ␻. Neglect the moment mgr produced by the weight of the rod.

Problem 7/81

7/82 The plate has a mass of 3 kg and is welded to the
ﬁxed vertical shaft, which rotates at the constant
speed of 20␲ rad/s. Compute the moment M applied
to the shaft by the plate due to dynamic imbalance.

z

m

100
mm 100
mm

0m

A

45°

20

r

z

m
0m

y
ω

O

20

x

y

x

Problem 7/79

7/80 If the semicircular rod of Prob. 7/79 starts from rest
under the action of a torque MO applied through the
collar about its z-axis of rotation, determine the initial bending moment M in the rod at A.

ω = 20π rad/s

Problem 7/82

556

Chapter 7

Introduction to Three-Dimensional Dynamics of Rigid Bodies

7/83 Each of the two semicircular disks has a mass of
1.20 kg and is welded to the shaft supported in bearings A and B as shown. Calculate the forces applied
to the shaft by the bearings for a constant angular
speed N ϭ 1200 rev/min. Neglect the forces of static
equilibrium.

7/86 The circular disk of mass m and radius r is mounted
on the vertical shaft with a small angle ␣ between its
plane and the plane of rotation of the shaft. Determine the expression for the bending moment M acting on the shaft due to the wobble of the disk at a
shaft speed of ␻ rad/s.

C
r

80 m
m

100 mm

80 m
m

A
N

G

80 m
m8
0m
m

α

x′

ω

y

B

x

x

O

y

z

100 mm

z

D

Problem 7/86

Problem 7/83

7/84 Solve Prob. 7/83 for the case where the assembly
starts from rest with an initial angular acceleration
␣ ϭ 900 rad/s2 as a result of a starting torque (couple) M applied to the shaft in the same sense as N.
Neglect the moment of inertia of the shaft about its
z-axis and calculate M.

7/87 The thin circular disk of mass m and radius R is
hinged about its horizontal tangent axis to the end of
a shaft rotating about its vertical axis with an angular velocity ␻. Determine the steady-state angle ␤ assumed by the plane of the disk with the vertical axis.
Observe any limitation on ␻ to ensure that ␤ Ͼ 0.

7/85 The uniform slender bar of mass ␳ per unit length is
freely pivoted about the y-axis at the clevis, which
rotates about the ﬁxed vertical z-axis with a constant
angular velocity ␻. Determine the steady-state angle
␪ assumed by the bar. Length b is greater than
length c.

ω

A

z

G

x

R
ω

x
β

β

z

c

z
Detail of hinge at A
Problem 7/87

y
x

b
θ

Problem 7/85

7/88 Determine the normal forces under the two disks of
Sample Problem 7/7 for the position where the plane
of the curved bar is vertical. Take the curved bar to
be at the top of disk A and at the bottom of disk B.

Article 7/10
7/89 The uniform square plate of mass m is welded at O
to the end of the shaft, which rotates about the vertical z-axis with a constant angular velocity ␻. Determine the moment applied to the plate by the weld
due only to the rotation.

Problems

557

7/92 The half-cylindrical shell of radius r, length 2b, and
mass m revolves about the vertical z-axis with a constant angular velocity ␻ as indicated. Determine the
magnitude M of the bending moment in the shaft at
A due to both the weight and the rotational motion
of the shell.
z
ω

ω
b/2

b
O b/2

y

b

r

x
r

x

A

y

b

Problem 7/92

β
z
Problem 7/89

7/90 For the plate of mass m in Prob. 7/89, determine the
y- and z-components of the moment applied to the
plate by the weld at O necessary to give the plate an
angular acceleration ␣ ϭ ␻ starting from rest. Ne˙
glect the moment due to the weight.

᭤ 7/93 The homogeneous thin triangular plate of mass m is
welded to the horizontal shaft, which rotates freely
in the bearings at A and B. If the plate is released
from rest in the horizontal position shown, determine the magnitude of the bearing reaction at A for
the instant just after release.
y

a

7/91 The uniform slender rod of length l is welded to the
bracket at A on the underside of the disk B. The disk
rotates about a vertical axis with a constant angular
velocity ␻. Determine the value of ␻ which will result in a zero moment supported by the weld at A for
the position ␪ ϭ 60Њ with b ϭ l/4.

ω

b

B

a
x
z

A

Problem 7/93

b
A

θ

l

Problem 7/91

B

᭤ 7/94 If the homogeneous triangular plate of Prob. 7/93 is
released from rest in the position shown, determine
the magnitude of the bearing reaction at A after the
plate has rotated 90Њ.

558

Chapter 7

Introduction to Three-Dimensional Dynamics of Rigid Bodies

7/11

Gyroscopic Motion: Steady Precession

One of the most interesting of all problems in dynamics is that of
gyroscopic motion. This motion occurs whenever the axis about which a
body is spinning is itself rotating about another axis. Although the complete description of this motion involves considerable complexity, the
most common and useful examples of gyroscopic motion occur when the
axis of a rotor spinning at constant speed turns (precesses) about another axis at a steady rate. Our discussion in this article will focus on
this special case.
The gyroscope has important engineering applications. With a
mounting in gimbal rings (see Fig. 7/19b), the gyro is free from external
moments, and its axis will retain a ﬁxed direction in space regardless of
the rotation of the structure to which it is attached. In this way, the
gyro is used for inertial guidance systems and other directional control
devices. With the addition of a pendulous mass to the inner gimbal ring,
the earth’s rotation causes the gyro to precess so that the spin axis will
always point north, and this action forms the basis of the gyro compass.
The gyroscope has also found important use as a stabilizing device. The
controlled precession of a large gyro mounted in a ship is used to produce a gyroscopic moment to counteract the rolling of a ship at sea. The
gyroscopic effect is also an extremely important consideration in the design of bearings for the shafts of rotors which are subjected to forced
precessions.
We will ﬁrst describe gyroscopic action with a simple physical approach which relies on our previous experience with the vector changes
encountered in particle kinetics. This approach will help us gain a direct
physical insight into gyroscopic action. Next, we will make use of the
general momentum relation, Eq. 7/19, for a more complete description.

y
Precession
axis

·
⏐Ω⏐= ψ

F

ψ

Spin
axis
z

F

p
M
Torque
axis

Figure 7/14

x

Simpliﬁed Approach
Figure 7/14 shows a symmetrical rotor spinning about the z-axis
with a large angular velocity p, known as the spin velocity. If we apply
two forces F to the rotor axle to form a couple M whose vector is directed along the x-axis, we will ﬁnd that the rotor shaft rotates in the xz plane about the y-axis in the sense indicated, with a relatively slow
˙
angular velocity ⍀ ϭ ␺ known as the precession velocity. Thus, we identify the spin axis (p), the torque axis (M), and the precession axis (⍀),
where the usual right-hand rule identiﬁes the sense of the rotation vectors. The rotor shaft does not turn about the x-axis in the sense of M,
as it would if the rotor were not spinning. To aid understanding of this
phenomenon, a direct analogy may be made between the rotation vectors and the familiar vectors which describe the curvilinear motion of a
particle.
Figure 7/15a shows a particle of mass m moving in the x-z plane with
constant speed ͉v͉ ϭ v. The application of a force F normal to its linear
momentum G ϭ mv causes a change dG ϭ d(mv) in its momentum. We
see that dG, and thus dv, is a vector in the direction of the normal force
˙
F according to Newton’s second law F ϭ G, which may be written as

Article 7/11

Gyroscopic Motion: Steady Precession

559

y

F dt ϭ dG. From Fig. 7/15b we see that, in the limit, tan d␪ ϭ d␪ ϭ F dt/mv
˙
˙
or F ϭ mv ␪ . In vector notation with ␻ ϭ ␪ j, the force becomes

F

F ϭ m␻ ؋ v

G = mv
dG = d(mv)

z

which is the vector equivalent of our familiar scalar relation Fn ϭ man
x
for the normal force on the particle, as treated extensively in Chapter 3.
(a)
With these relations in mind, we now turn to our problem of rota˙
tion. Recall now the analogous equation M ϭ H which we developed for
y
any prescribed mass system, rigid or nonrigid, referred to its mass center (Eq. 4/9) or to a ﬁxed point O (Eq. 4/7). We now apply this relation to
·
ω =θj
our symmetrical rotor, as shown in Fig. 7/15c. For a high rate of spin p
and a low precession rate ⍀ about the y-axis, the angular momentum is
represented by the vector H ϭ Ip, where I ϭ Izz is the moment of inertia
F dt = d(mv)
mv
of the rotor about the spin axis.
dθ
z
Initially, we neglect the small component of angular momentum
x
about the y-axis which accompanies the slow precession. The application
(b)
of the couple M normal to H causes a change dH ϭ d(Ip) in the angular
y
momentum. We see that dH, and thus dp, is a vector in the direction of
M
˙ , which may also be written M dt ϭ dH. Just
the couple M since M ϭ H
as the change in the linear-momentum vector of the particle is in the direction of the applied force, so is the change in the angular-momentum
H = Ip
vector of the gyro in the direction of the couple. Thus, we see that the
z
vectors M, H, and dH are analogous to the vectors F, G, and dG. With
dH = d(Ip)
this insight, it is no longer strange to see the rotation vector undergo a
·
(M = H)
change which is in the direction of M, thereby causing the axis of the
(c)
x
rotor to precess about the y-axis.
y
In Fig. 7/15d we see that during time dt the angular-momentum
vector Ip has swung through the angle d␺, so that in the limit with
tan d␺ ϭ d␺, we have
·
·
(F = G)

Ω =ψj

d␺ ϭ

M dt
Ip

or

MϭI

d␺
p
dt

Ip

dψ

M dt = d(Ip)

z
x

Substituting ⍀ ϭ d␺/dt for the magnitude of the precession velocity
gives us
M ϭ I⍀p

(7/24)

We note that M, ⍀, and p as vectors are mutually perpendicular, and
that their vector relationship may be represented by writing the equation in the cross-product form
M ϭ I⍀ ؋ p

(7/24a)

which is completely analogous to the foregoing relation F ϭ m␻ ؋ v for
the curvilinear motion of a particle as developed from Figs. 7/15a and b.

(d)

Figure 7/15

Ω

560

Chapter 7

Introduction to Three-Dimensional Dynamics of Rigid Bodies
Ω

Equations 7/24 and 7/24a apply to moments taken about the mass center or about a ﬁxed point on the axis of rotation.
The correct spatial relationship among the three vectors may be remembered from the fact that dH, and thus dp, is in the direction of M,
which establishes the correct sense for the precession ⍀. Therefore, the
spin vector p always tends to rotate toward the torque vector M. Figure
7/16 represents three orientations of the three vectors which are consistent with their correct order. Unless we establish this order correctly in
a given problem, we are likely to arrive at a conclusion directly opposite
to the correct one. Remember that Eq. 7/24, like F ϭ ma and M ϭ I␣, is
an equation of motion, so that the couple M represents the couple due to
all forces acting on the rotor, as disclosed by a correct free-body diagram
of the rotor. Also note that, when a rotor is forced to precess, as occurs
with the turbine in a ship which is executing a turn, the motion will
generate a gyroscopic couple M which obeys Eq. 7/24a in both magnitude and sense.
In the foregoing discussion of gyroscopic motion, it was assumed
that the spin was large and the precession was small. Although we can
see from Eq. 7/24 that for given values of I and M, the precession ⍀
must be small if p is large, let us now examine the inﬂuence of ⍀ on the
momentum relations. Again, we restrict our attention to steady precession, where ⍀ has a constant magnitude.
Figure 7/17 shows our same rotor again. Because it has a moment of
inertia about the y-axis and an angular velocity of precession about this
axis, there will be an additional component of angular momentum about
the y-axis. Thus, we have the two components Hz ϭ Ip and Hy ϭ I0⍀,
where I0 stands for Iyy and, again, I stands for Izz. The total angular momentum is H as shown. The change in H remains dH ϭ M dt as previously, and the precession during time dt is the angle d␺ ϭ M dt/Hz ϭ
M dt/(Ip) as before. Thus, Eq. 7/24 is still valid and for steady precession
is an exact description of the motion as long as the spin axis is perpendicular to the axis around which precession occurs.
Consider now the steady precession of a symmetrical top, Fig.
7/18, spinning about its axis with a high angular velocity p and supported at its point O. Here the spin axis makes an angle ␪ with the
vertical Z-axis around which precession occurs. Again, we will neglect
the small angular-momentum component due to the precession and
consider H equal to Ip, the angular momentum about the axis of the
top associated with the spin only. The moment about O is due to the
weight and is mgr sin ␪, where r is the distance from O to the mass
center G. From the diagram, we see that the angular-momentum vector HO has a change dHO ϭ MO dt in the direction of MO during time dt
and that ␪ is unchanged. The increment in precessional angle around
the Z-axis is

Ω

p
M
p
Ω
M
Ω
M

Ω

Ω

p

Ω
Figure

7/16
y

Ω

·
Ω =ψj

H′

Hy

H
dH
z

Hz

dψ
M dt = dH

x

Figure 7/17
z

Z
dHO = MO dt
dψ

θ

HO ≈ Ip
y

G
_
r
mg

θ

O

Y

d␺ ϭ

MO
x
X

Figure 7/18

MO dt
Ip sin ␪

Substituting the values MO ϭ mgr sin ␪ and ⍀ ϭ d␺/dt gives
mgr sin ␪ ϭ I⍀p sin ␪

or

mgr ϭ I⍀p

Article 7/11

Gyroscopic Motion: Steady Precession

561

which is independent of ␪. Introducing the radius of gyration so that I ϭ
mk2 and solving for the precessional velocity give
⍀ϭ

gr
k2p

(7/25)

Unlike Eq. 7/24, which is an exact description for the rotor of Fig.
7/17 with precession conﬁned to the x-z plane, Eq. 7/25 is an approximation based on the assumption that the angular momentum associated
with ⍀ is negligible compared with that associated with p. We will see
the amount of the error associated with this approximation when we reconsider steady-state precession later in this article. On the basis of our
analysis, the top will have a steady precession at the constant angle ␪
only if it is set in motion with a value of ⍀ which satisﬁes Eq. 7/25.
When these conditions are not met, the precession becomes unsteady,
and ␪ may oscillate with an amplitude which increases as the spin velocity decreases. The corresponding rise and fall of the rotation axis is
called nutation.

z

y

O
x

(a)

More Detailed Analysis
We now make direct use of Eq. 7/19, which is the general angularmomentum equation for a rigid body, by applying it to a body spinning
about its axis of rotational symmetry. This equation is valid for rotation
about a ﬁxed point or for rotation about the mass center. A spinning
top, the rotor of a gyroscope, and a spacecraft are examples of bodies
whose motions can be described by the equations for rotation about a
point. The general moment equations for this class of problems are
fairly complex, and their complete solutions involve the use of elliptic integrals and somewhat lengthy computations. However, a large fraction
of engineering problems where the motion is one of rotation about a
point involves the steady precession of bodies of revolution which are
spinning about their axes of symmetry. These conditions greatly simplify the equations and thus facilitate their solution.
Consider a body with axial symmetry, Fig. 7/19a, rotating about a
ﬁxed point O on its axis, which is taken to be the z-direction. With O as
origin, the x- and y-axes automatically become principal axes of inertia
along with the z-axis. This same description may be used for the rotation of a similar symmetrical body about its center of mass G, which is
taken as the origin of coordinates as shown with the gimbaled gyroscope
rotor of Fig. 7/19b. Again, the x- and y-axes are principal axes of inertia
for point G. The same description may also be used to represent the rotation about the mass center of an axially symmetric body in space, such
as the spacecraft in Fig. 7/19c. In each case, we note that, regardless of
the rotation of the axes or of the body relative to the axes (spin about
the z-axis), the moments of inertia about the x- and y-axes remain constant with time. The principal moments of inertia are again designated
Izz ϭ I and Ixx ϭ Iyy ϭ I0. The products of inertia are, of course, zero.
Before applying Eq. 7/19, we introduce a set of coordinates which
provide a natural description for our problem. These coordinates are

z

θ
y

G
x

(b)
z
y

G
x

(c)

Figure 7/19

562

Chapter 7

Introduction to Three-Dimensional Dynamics of Rigid Bodies

shown in Fig. 7/20 for the example of rotation about a ﬁxed point O. The
axes X-Y-Z are ﬁxed in space, and plane A contains the X-Y axes and the
ﬁxed point O on the rotor axis. Plane B contains point O and is always
normal to the rotor axis. Angle ␪ measures the inclination of the rotor
axis from the vertical Z-axis and is also a measure of the angle between
planes A and B. The intersection of the two planes is the x-axis, which is
located by the angle ␺ from the X-axis. The y-axis lies in plane B, and
the z-axis coincides with the rotor axis. The angles ␪ and ␺ completely
specify the position of the rotor axis. The angular displacement of the
rotor with respect to axes x-y-z is speciﬁed by the angle ␾ measured
from the x-axis to the xЈ-axis, which is attached to the rotor. The spin
˙
velocity becomes p ϭ ␾ .

z

y

Z
ΣMz

ΣMy
θ

·
Ωz = ψ cos θ
ωz = Ωz + p
·
where p = φ

·
Ω y = ω y = ψ sin θ

x′

A

O

·
φ

φ

ψ

Y
·
Ωx = ω x = θ

X
B

ΣMx
x

Figure 7/20
The components of the angular velocity ␻ of the rotor and the angular velocity ⍀ of the axes x-y-z from Fig. 7/20 become

˙
⍀x ϭ ␪

˙
␻x ϭ ␪

˙
⍀y ϭ ␺ sin ␪

˙
␻y ϭ ␺ sin ␪

˙
⍀z ϭ ␺ cos ␪

˙
␻z ϭ ␺ cos ␪ ϩ p

It is important to note that the axes and the body have identical x- and
y-components of angular velocity, but that the z-components differ by
the relative angular velocity p.
The angular-momentum components from Eq. 7/12 become

˙
Hx ϭ Ixx␻x ϭ I0 ␪
˙
Hy ϭ Iyy␻y ϭ I0 ␺ sin ␪
˙
Hz ϭ Izz␻z ϭ I(␺ cos ␪ ϩ p)

Article 7/11

Gyroscopic Motion: Steady Precession

Substitution of the angular-velocity and angular-momentum components into Eq. 7/19 yields

˙ ˙
¨ ˙
ΣMx ϭ I0( ␪ Ϫ ␺ 2 sin ␪ cos ␪) ϩ I␺ (␺ cos ␪ ϩ p) sin ␪
¨
˙˙
˙ ˙
ΣMy ϭ I0(␺ sin ␪ ϩ 2␺ ␪ cos ␪) Ϫ I ␪ (␺ cos ␪ ϩ p)
ΣMz ϭ I

(7/26)

d ˙
(␺ cos ␪ ϩ p)
dt

Equations 7/26 are the general equations of rotation of a symmetrical
body about either a ﬁxed point O or the mass center G. In a given problem, the solution to the equations will depend on the moment sums applied to the body about the three coordinate axes. We will conﬁne our
use of these equations to two particular cases of rotation about a point
which are described in the following sections.

Steady-State Precession
We now examine the conditions under which the rotor precesses at a
˙
steady rate ␺ at a constant angle ␪ and with constant spin velocity p. Thus,

˙
␺ ϭ constant,

¨
␺ϭ0

␪ ϭ constant,

˙ ¨
␪ ϭ ␪ ϭ0

p ϭ constant,

p
˙ϭ0

and Eqs. 7/26 become

˙
˙
˙
ΣMx ϭ ␺ sin ␪[I(␺ cos ␪ ϩ p) Ϫ I0 ␺ cos ␪]
ΣMy ϭ 0

(7/27)

ΣMz ϭ 0
From these results, we see that the required moment acting on the
rotor about O (or about G) must be in the x-direction since the y- and
˙
z-components are zero. Furthermore, with the constant values of ␪, ␺ ,
and p, the moment is constant in magnitude. It is also important to note
that the moment axis is perpendicular to the plane deﬁned by the precession axis (Z-axis) and the spin axis (z-axis).
We may also obtain Eqs. 7/27 by recognizing that the components of
˙
H remain constant as observed in x-y-z so that (H)xyz ϭ 0. Because in
˙
general ΣM ϭ (H)xyz ϩ ⍀ ؋ H, we have for the case of steady precession
ΣM ϭ ⍀ ؋ H

(7/28)

which reduces to Eqs. 7/27 upon substitution of the values of ⍀ and H.
By far the most common engineering examples of gyroscopic motion
occur when precession takes place about an axis which is normal to the
rotor axis, as in Fig. 7/14. Thus with the substitution ␪ ϭ ␲/2, ␻z ϭ p,
˙
␺ ϭ ⍀, and ΣMx ϭ M, we have from Eqs. 7/27
M ϭ I⍀p

[7/24]

563

564

Chapter 7

Introduction to Three-Dimensional Dynamics of Rigid Bodies

which we derived initially in this article from a direct analysis of this
special case.
Now let us examine the steady precession of the rotor (symmetrical
top) of Fig. 7/20 for any constant value of ␪ other than ␲/2. The moment
ΣMx about the x-axis is due to the weight of the rotor and is mgr sin ␪.
Substitution into Eqs. 7/27 and rearrangement of terms give us

˙
˙
mgr ϭ I␺ p Ϫ (I0 Ϫ I)␺ 2 cos ␪
˙
We see that ␺ is small when p is large, so that the second term on
the right-hand side of the equation becomes very small compared with
˙
˙
I␺ p. If we neglect this smaller term, we have ␺ ϭ mgr/(Ip) which, upon
˙
use of the previous substitution ⍀ ϭ ␺ and mk2 ϭ I, becomes
⍀ϭ

gr
k2p

[7/25]

We derived this same relation earlier by assuming that the angular momentum was entirely along the spin axis.

Z

HG

z

ω

y

HG z
ωz

HG y

β

⋅

φ

θ

ωy

G

Steady Precession with Zero Moment
Consider now the motion of a symmetrical rotor with no external
moment about its mass center. Such motion is encountered with spacecraft and projectiles which both spin and precess during ﬂight.
Figure 7/21 represents such a body. Here the Z-axis, which has a ﬁxed
direction in space, is chosen to coincide with the direction of the angular
momentum HG, which is constant since ΣMG ϭ 0. The x-y-z axes are attached in the manner described in Fig. 7/20. From Fig. 7/21 the three components of momentum are HGx ϭ 0, HGy ϭ HG sin ␪, HGz ϭ HG cos ␪.
From the deﬁning relations, Eqs. 7/12, with the notation of this article,
these components are also given by HGx ϭ I0␻x, HGy ϭ I0␻y, HGz ϭ I␻z.
Thus, ␻x ϭ ⍀x ϭ 0 so that ␪ is constant. This result means that the motion is one of steady precession about the constant HG vector.
With no x-component, the angular velocity ␻ of the rotor lies in the
y-z plane along with the Z-axis and makes an angle ␤ with the z-axis.
The relationship between ␤ and ␪ is obtained from tan ␪ ϭ HGy /HGz ϭ
I0␻y /(I␻z), which is

x

tan ␪ ϭ

Figure 7/21

I0
tan ␤
I

(7/29)

Thus, the angular velocity ␻ makes a constant angle ␤ with the spin axis.
The rate of precession is easily obtained from Eq. 7/27 with M ϭ 0,
which gives

˙
␺ϭ

Ip
(I0 Ϫ I) cos ␪

(7/30)

It is clear from this relation that the direction of the precession depends
on the relative magnitudes of the two moments of inertia.

Article 7/11

Gyroscopic Motion: Steady Precession

565

Z
Z

Space cone

z

ω

⋅

ψ

Body
cone

p

Space cone

β

ω

z

θ

⋅
ψ

β
θ

Body cone

G
G

p

Direct precession I0 > I

Retrograde precession I0 < I

(a)

(b)

Figure 7/22

If I Ͼ I0, then ␪ Ͻ ␤, as indicated in Fig. 7/22b, and the precession is
said to be retrograde. In this instance, the space cone is internal to the
˙
body cone, and ␺ and p have opposite signs.
If I ϭ I0, then ␪ ϭ ␤ from Eq. 7/29, and Fig. 7/22 shows that both
angles must be zero to be equal. For this case, the body has no precession and merely rotates with an angular velocity p. This condition occurs for a body with point symmetry, such as with a homogeneous
sphere.

Media Bakery

If I0 Ͼ I, then ␤ Ͻ ␪, as indicated in Fig. 7/22a, and the precession is
said to be direct. Here the body cone rolls on the outside of the space
cone.

Toy gyroscopes are useful in demonstrating the principles of this article.

566

Chapter 7

Introduction to Three-Dimensional Dynamics of Rigid Bodies

SAMPLE PROBLEM 7/8

Port
(left)

The turbine rotor in a ship’s power plant has a mass of 1000 kg, with center
of mass at G and a radius of gyration of 200 mm. The rotor shaft is mounted in
bearings A and B with its axis in the horizontal fore-and-aft direction and turns
counterclockwise at a speed of 500 rev/min when viewed from the stern. Determine the vertical components of the bearing reactions at A and B if the ship is
making a turn to port (left) of 400-m radius at a speed of 25 knots (1 knot ϭ
0.514 m/s). Does the bow of the ship tend to rise or fall because of the gyroscopic
action?

B

Forward

p
G
A

RB

RA

Starboard
(right)

900
mm

600
mm

y

Solution.

The vertical component of the bearing reactions will equal the static
reactions R1 and R2 due to the weight of the rotor, plus or minus the increment
⌬R due to the gyroscopic effect. The moment principle from statics easily gives
ᕡ R1 ϭ 5890 N and R2 ϭ 3920 N. The given directions of the spin velocity p and
the precession velocity ⍀ are shown with the free-body diagram of the rotor. Because the spin axis always tends to rotate toward the torque axis, we see that the
torque axis M points in the starboard direction as shown. The sense of the ⌬R’s
is, therefore, up at B and down at A to produce the couple M. Thus, the bearing
reactions at A and B are
RA ϭ R1 Ϫ ⌬R

and

Ω
B
p

R2
z

⍀ϭ

ΔR

R1
ΔR

RB ϭ R2 ϩ ⌬R

The precession velocity ⍀ is the speed of the ship divided by the radius of
its turn.
[v ϭ ␳⍀]

G

A

M
1000(9.81) N

ΔR
R1

25(0.514)
ϭ 0.0321 rad/s
400

x

ΔR
R2

M

Equation 7/24 is now applied around the mass center G of the rotor to give
[M ϭ I⍀p]

1.500(⌬R) ϭ 1000(0.200)2(0.0321)

΄5000(2␲)΅
60

The required bearing reactions become
and

ᕡ If the ship is making a left turn,
the rotation is counterclockwise as
viewed from above, and the precession vector ⍀ is up by the righthand rule.

⌬R ϭ 449 N

RA ϭ 5890 Ϫ 449 ϭ 5440 N

Helpful Hints

RB ϭ 3920 ϩ 449 ϭ 4370 N Ans.

We now observe that the forces just computed are those exerted on the rotor

ᕢ shaft by the structure of the ship. Consequently, from the principle of action and

reaction, the equal and opposite forces are applied to the ship by the rotor shaft,
as shown in the bottom sketch. Therefore, the effect of the gyroscopic couple is
to generate the increments ⌬R shown, and the bow will tend to fall and the stern
to rise (but only slightly).

ᕢ After figuring the correct sense of
M on the rotor, the common mistake is to apply it to the ship in the
same sense, forgetting the actionand-reaction principle. Clearly, the
results are then reversed. (Be certain not to make this mistake when
operating a vertical gyro stabilizer
in your yacht to counteract its roll!)

Article 7/11

Gyroscopic Motion: Steady Precession

SAMPLE PROBLEM 7/9

x

z

A proposed space station is closely approximated by four uniform spherical
shells, each of mass m and radius r. The mass of the connecting structure and internal equipment may be neglected as a ﬁrst approximation. If the station is designed to rotate about its z-axis at the rate of one revolution every 4 seconds,
determine (a) the number n of complete cycles of precession for each revolution
about the z-axis if the plane of rotation deviates only slightly from a ﬁxed orientation, and (b) ﬁnd the period ␶ of precession if the spin axis z makes an angle of
20Њ with respect to the axis of ﬁxed orientation about which precession occurs.
Draw the space and body cones for this latter condition.

567

2r

r

O

Solution. (a) The number of precession cycles or wobbles for each revolution

˙
of the station about the z-axis would be the ratio of the precessional velocity ␺ to
the spin velocity p, which, from Eq. 7/30, is
˙
␺
I
ϭ
(I0 Ϫ I) cos ␪
p
The moments of inertia are
56

Izz ϭ I ϭ 4[2 mr2 ϩ m(2r)2] ϭ 3 mr2
3

ᕡ

Helpful Hint
32

2
2
Ixx ϭ I0 ϭ 2(3)mr2 ϩ 2[3 mr2 ϩ m(2r)2] ϭ 3 mr2

ᕡ Our theory is based on the assump-

With ␪ very small, cos ␪ ഡ 1, and the ratio of angular rates becomes
56

˙
␺
7
3
nϭ ϭ
ϭϪ
32
56
3
p
Ϫ 3
3

Ans.

tion that Ixx ϭ Iyy ϭ the moment of
inertia about any axis through G
perpendicular to the z-axis. Such is
the case here, and you should prove
it to your own satisfaction.

˙
The minus sign indicates retrograde precession where, in the present case, ␺
and p are essentially of opposite sense. Thus, the station will make seven wobbles for every three revolutions.
z

(b) For ␪ ϭ 20Њ and p ϭ 2␲/4 rad/s, the period of precession or wobble is ␶ ϭ

β = 32.5°
θ = 20°

˙
2␲/͉␺ ͉, so that from Eq. 7/30

Ans.
The precession is retrograde, and the body cone is external to the space cone
as shown in the illustration where the body-cone angle, from Eq. 7/29, is

·

56/3
I
tan ␤ ϭ tan ␪ ϭ
(0.364) ϭ 0.637
I0
32/3

ψ

␤ ϭ 32.5Њ

O

p

568

Chapter 7

Introduction to Three-Dimensional Dynamics of Rigid Bodies

PROBLEMS
Introductory Problems
7/95 A dynamics instructor demonstrates gyroscopic principles to his students. He suspends a rapidly spinning
wheel with a string attached to one end of its horizontal axle. Describe the precession motion of the wheel.

7/98 The 50-kg wheel is a solid circular disk which rolls
on the horizontal plane in a circle of 600-mm radius.
The wheel shaft is pivoted about the axis O-O and is
driven by the vertical shaft at the constant rate
N ϭ 48 rev/min about the Z-axis. Determine the
normal force R between the wheel and the horizontal surface. Neglect the weight of the horizontal shaft.
Z

z

600
mm
N

y

O

350
mm
G
p

O

Problem 7/95

7/96 The student has volunteered to assist in a classroom
demonstration involving a momentum wheel which is
rapidly spinning with angular speed p as shown. The
instructor has asked her to hold the axle of the wheel
in the horizontal position shown and then attempt to
tilt the axis upward in a vertical plane. What motion
tendency of the wheel assembly will the student sense?

Problem 7/98

7/99 The special-purpose fan is mounted as shown. The
motor armature, shaft, and blades have a combined
mass of 2.2 kg with radius of gyration of 60 mm. The
axial position b of the 0.8-kg block A can be adjusted.
With the fan turned off, the unit is balanced about
the x-axis when b ϭ 180 mm. The motor and fan operate at 1725 rev/min in the direction shown. Determine the value of b which will produce a steady
precession of 0.2 rad/s about the positive y-axis.
y

b

p

O

z

A
x

Problem 7/96

7/97 A car makes a turn to the right on a level road. Determine whether the normal reaction under the right
rear wheel is increased or decreased as a result of the
gyroscopic effect of the precessing wheels.

Problem 7/99

Article 7/11
7/100 An airplane has just cleared the runway with a
takeoff speed v. Each of its freely spinning wheels
has a mass m, with a radius of gyration k about its
axle. As seen from the front of the airplane, the
wheel precesses at the angular rate ⍀ as the landing strut is folded into the wing about its pivot O.
As a result of the gyroscopic action, the supporting
member A exerts a torsional moment M on B to
prevent the tubular member from rotating in the
sleeve at B. Determine M and identify whether it is
in the sense of M1 or M2.
O

Ω

A

r

Problems

569

Representative Problems
7/103 A small air compressor for an aircraft cabin consists
of the 3.50-kg turbine A which drives the 2.40-kg
blower B at a speed of 20 000 rev/min. The shaft of
the assembly is mounted transversely to the direction of ﬂight and is viewed from the rear of the aircraft in the ﬁgure. The radii of gyration of A and B
are 79.0 and 71.0 mm, respectively. Calculate the radial forces exerted on the shaft by the bearings at C
and D if the aircraft executes a clockwise roll (rotation about the longitudinal ﬂight axis) of 2 rad/s
viewed from the rear of the aircraft. Neglect the
small moments caused by the weights of the rotors.
Draw a free-body diagram of the shaft as viewed
from above and indicate the shape of its deﬂected
centerline.

b
B
B

M1
M2

B

A

C
150 mm

Problem 7/100

7/101 An experimental antipollution bus is powered by
the kinetic energy stored in a large ﬂywheel which
spins at a high speed p in the direction indicated.
As the bus encounters a short upward ramp, the
front wheels rise, thus causing the ﬂywheel to precess. What changes occur to the forces between the
tires and the road during this sudden change?

D

Problem 7/103

7/104 The two solid cones with the same base and equal
altitudes are spinning in space about their common
axis at the rate p. For what ratio h/r will precession
of their spin axis be impossible?
p

h

r

Problem 7/101
h

7/102 The 210-kg rotor of a turbojet aircraft engine has a
radius of gyration of 220 mm and rotates counterclockwise at 18 000 rev/min as viewed from the
front. If the aircraft is traveling at 1200 km/h and
starts to execute an inside vertical loop of 3800-m
radius, compute the gyroscopic moment M transmitted to the airframe. What correction to the controls does the pilot have to make in order to remain
in the vertical plane?

Problem 7/104

570

Chapter 7

Introduction to Three-Dimensional Dynamics of Rigid Bodies
z

7/105 The blades and hub of the helicopter rotor weigh
140 lb and have a radius of gyration of 10 ft about
the z-axis of rotation. With the rotor turning at
500 rev/min during a short interval following vertical liftoff, the helicopter tilts forward at the rate
˙
␪ ϭ 10 deg/sec in order to acquire forward velocity. Determine the gyroscopic moment M transmitted to the body of the helicopter by its rotor and
indicate whether the helicopter tends to deﬂect
clockwise or counterclockwise, as viewed by a passenger facing forward.
z

θ

p

G
–
r

O

Vertical
θ

Enlarged view
of tip contact

Problem 7/106

p

x

Problem 7/105

7/106 The 4-oz top with radius of gyration about its
spin axis of 0.62 in. is spinning at the rate p ϭ
3600 rev/min in the sense shown, with its spin
axis making an angle ␪ ϭ 20Њ with the vertical.
The distance from its tip O to its mass center G is
r ϭ 2.5 in. Determine the precession ⍀ of the top
and explain why ␪ gradually decreases as long as
the spin rate remains large. An enlarged view of
the contact of the tip is shown.

7/107 The ﬁgure shows a gyro mounted with a vertical
axis and used to stabilize a hospital ship against
rolling. The motor A turns the pinion which precesses the gyro by rotating the large precession gear
B and attached rotor assembly about a horizontal
transverse axis in the ship. The rotor turns inside
the housing at a clockwise speed of 960 rev/min as
viewed from the top and has a mass of 80 Mg with
radius of gyration of 1.45 m. Calculate the moment
exerted on the hull structure by the gyro if the
motor turns the precession gear B at the rate of
0.320 rad/s. In which of the two directions, (a) or
(b), should the motor turn in order to counteract a
roll of the ship to port?
Vertical

B

Port
(left)

Forward

Starboard
(right)

A

(a)

(b)

Problem 7/107

Article 7/11
7/108 Each of the identical wheels has a mass of 4 kg and a
radius of gyration kz ϭ 120 mm and is mounted on a
horizontal shaft AB secured to the vertical shaft at O.
In case (a), the horizontal shaft is ﬁxed to a collar at
O which is free to rotate about the vertical y-axis. In
case (b), the shaft is secured by a yoke hinged about
the x-axis to the collar. If the wheel has a large angular velocity p ϭ 3600 rev/min about its z-axis in the
position shown, determine any precession which occurs and the bending moment MA in the shaft at A
for each case. Neglect the small mass of the shaft
and ﬁtting at O.

Side view of carriage
1
4′ 8 – ″
2
33″

y

80
mm

571

v

y
A

400
mm

80
mm

400
mm

Problems

5″

B

View of wheels and axle
x

Problem 7/110

x
O
A

O
A

B
p

z

B

z

p
(a)

(b)
Problem 7/108

7/109 If the wheel in case (a) of Prob. 7/108 is forced to
precess about the vertical by a mechanical drive at
the steady rate ⍀ ϭ 2j rad/s, determine the bending moment in the horizontal shaft at A. In the absence of friction, what torque MO is applied to the
collar at O to sustain this motion?
7/110 The ﬁgure shows the side view of the wheel carriage
(truck) of a railway passenger car where the vertical
load is transmitted to the frame in which the journal wheel bearings are located. The lower view
shows only one pair of wheels and their axle which
rotates with the wheels. Each of the 33-in.-diameter
wheels weighs 560 lb, and the axle weighs 300 lb
with a diameter of 5 in. Both wheels and axle are
made of steel with a speciﬁc weight of 489 lb/ft3. If
the train is traveling at 80 mi/hr while rounding an
8Њ curve to the right (radius of curvature 717 ft),
calculate the change ⌬R in the vertical force supported by each wheel due only to the gyroscopic action. As a close approximation, treat each wheel as a
uniform circular disk and the axle as a uniform
solid cylinder. Also assume that both rails are in the
same horizontal plane.

7/111 The primary structure of a proposed space station
consists of ﬁve spherical shells connected by tubular spokes. The moment of inertia of the structure
about its geometric axis A-A is twice as much as
that about any axis through O normal to A-A. The
station is designed to rotate about its geometric
axis at the constant rate of 3 rev/min. If the spin
axis A-A precesses about the Z-axis of ﬁxed orientation and makes a very small angle with it, calculate
˙
the rate ␺ at which the station wobbles. The mass
center O has negligible acceleration.
Z
A

O

A
Problem 7/111

572

Chapter 7

Introduction to Three-Dimensional Dynamics of Rigid Bodies

7/112 The uniform 640-mm rod has a mass of 3 kg and is
welded centrally to the uniform 160-mm-radius circular disk which has a mass of 8 kg. The unit is
given a spin velocity p ϭ 60 rad/s in the direction
shown. The axis of the rod is seen to wobble through
˙
a total angle of 30Њ. Calculate the angular velocity ␺
˙
˙
of precession and determine whether it is ␺ 1 or ␺ 2.
or

320
mm

·
ψ2

·
ψ1

7/114 The spacecraft shown is symmetrical about its z-axis
and has a radius of gyration of 720 mm about this
axis. The radii of gyration about the x- and y-axes
through the mass center are both equal to 540 mm.
When moving in space, the z-axis is observed to generate a cone with a total vertex angle of 4Њ as it precesses about the axis of total angular momentum. If
˙
the spacecraft has a spin velocity ␾ about its z-axis
of 1.5 rad/s, compute the period ␶ of each full precession. Is the spin vector in the positive or negative z-direction?

30°

z
HG

p

2°

160
mm

·
ψ1
or ·
ψ2

320
mm

y

G

Problem 7/112

7/113 The electric motor has a total weight of 20 lb and is
supported by the mounting brackets A and B attached to the rotating disk. The armature of the
motor has a weight of 5 lb and a radius of gyration
of 1.5 in. and turns counterclockwise at a speed of
1725 rev/min as viewed from A to B. The turntable
revolves about its vertical axis at the constant rate
of 48 rev/min in the direction shown. Determine
the vertical components of the forces supported by
the mounting brackets at A and B.
8′′
6′′

6′′

x

Problem 7/114

7/115 The 8-lb rotor with radius of gyration of 3 in. rotates
on ball bearings at a speed of 3000 rev/min about its
shaft OG. The shaft is free to pivot about the X-axis,
as well as to rotate about the Z-axis. Calculate the
vector ⍀ for precession about the Z-axis. Neglect the
mass of shaft OG and compute the gyroscopic couple
M exerted by the shaft on the rotor at G.
Vertical
Z

G

K

B
A

Y
i

O

9″

X, x

p

Problem 7/113
G

70°

Problem 7/115

Article 7/11
7/116 The housing of the electric motor is freely pivoted
about the horizontal x-axis, which passes through
the mass center G of the rotor. If the motor is turn˙
ing at the constant rate ␾ ϭ p, determine the angu¨
lar acceleration ␺ which will result from the
application of the moment M about the vertical
˙
shaft if ˙ ϭ ␺ ϭ 0. The mass of the frame and hous␥
ing is considered negligible compared with the mass
m of the rotor. The radius of gyration of the rotor
about the z-axis is kz and that about the x-axis is kx.

Problems

573

7/118 A boy throws a thin circular disk (like a Frisbee)
with a spin rate of 300 rev/min. The plane of the
disk is seen to wobble through a total angle of 10Њ.
Calculate the period ␶ of the wobble and indicate
whether the precession is direct or retrograde.
10°

y

p

z

γ

G
Problem 7/118
x
b

·
ψ
M

Problem 7/116

7/119 The ﬁgure shows a football in three common inﬂight conﬁgurations. Case (a) is a perfectly thrown
spiral pass with a spin rate of 120 rev/min. Case (b)
is a wobbly spiral pass again with a spin rate of
120 rev/min about its own axis, but with the axis
wobbling through a total angle of 20Њ. Case (c) is
an end-over-end place kick with a rotational rate
of 120 rev/min. For each case, specify the values of
˙
p, ␪, ␤, and ␺ as deﬁned in this article. The moment of inertia about the long axis of the ball is 0.3
of that about the transverse axis of symmetry.

7/117 The thin ring is projected into the air with a spin
velocity of 300 rev/min. If its geometric axis is
observed to have a very slight precessional wobble,
determine the frequency ƒ of the wobble.

20°

Problem 7/119

300 rev/min

Problem 7/117

574

Chapter 7

Introduction to Three-Dimensional Dynamics of Rigid Bodies

7/120 The rectangular bar is spinning in space about its
longitudinal axis at the rate p ϭ 200 rev/min. If its
axis wobbles through a total angle of 20Њ as shown,
calculate the period ␶ of the wobble.

20°

7/122 The uniform slender bar of mass m and length l is
centrally mounted on the shaft A-A, about which it
˙
rotates with a constant speed ␾ ϭ p. Simultaneously, the yoke is forced to rotate about the x-axis
with a constant speed ␻0. As a function of ␾, determine the magnitude of the torque M required to
maintain the constant speed ␻0. (Hint: Apply Eq.
7/19 to obtain the x-component of M.)
z
A

p
4″

p
O

ω0

M

φ

φ

4″
x

8″

l

A

B

y

O
Problem 7/122

Problem 7/120

7/121 The 5-kg disk and hub A have a radius of gyration
of 85 mm about the z0-axis and spin at the rate
p ϭ 1250 rev/min. Simultaneously, the assembly
rotates about the vertical z-axis at the rate ⍀ ϭ 400
rev/min. Calculate the gyroscopic moment M exerted on the shaft at C by the disk and the bending
moment MO in the shaft at O. Neglect the mass of
the shaft but otherwise account for all forces acting
on it.

᭤ 7/123 The solid circular disk of mass m and small thickness is spinning freely on its shaft at the rate p. If
the assembly is released in the vertical position at
˙
␪ ϭ 0 with ␪ ϭ 0, determine the horizontal components of the forces A and B exerted by the respective bearings on the horizontal shaft as the position
␪ ϭ ␲/2 is passed. Neglect the mass of the two
shafts compared with m and neglect all friction.
Solve by using the appropriate moment equations.
z

r

p
0m
30

Ω

20°

b
b

y
Problem 7/123

mm O

x
Problem 7/121

l
B

C
A

100

θ

A

z

B

p

z0

m

Article 7/11
᭤7/124 The earth-scanning satellite is in a circular orbit of
period ␶. The angular velocity of the satellite about
its y- or pitch-axis is ␻ ϭ 2␲/␶, and the angular
rates about the x- and z-axes are zero. Thus, the
x-axis of the satellite always points to the center of
the earth. The satellite has a reaction-wheel
attitude-control system consisting of the three
wheels shown, each of which may be variably
torqued by its individual motor. The angular rate
⍀z of the z-wheel relative to the satellite is ⍀0 at
time t ϭ 0, and the x- and y-wheels are at rest relative to the satellite at t ϭ 0. Determine the axial
torques Mx, My, and Mz which must be exerted by
the motors on the shafts of their respective wheels
in order that the angular velocity ␻ of the satellite
will remain constant. The moment of inertia of
each reaction wheel about its axis is I. The x and z
reaction-wheel speeds are harmonic functions of
the time with a period equal to that of the orbit.
Plot the variations of the torques and the relative
wheel speeds ⍀x, ⍀y, and ⍀z as functions of the time
during one orbit period. (Hint: The torque to accelerate the x-wheel equals the reaction of the gyroscopic moment on the z-wheel, and vice versa.)

O

Ωz O

y
z

Ωy
y

r
h

h

Problem 7/125

᭤7/126 The solid cylindrical rotor weighs 64.4 lb and is
mounted in bearings A and B of the frame which
rotates about the vertical Z-axis. If the rotor spins
at the constant rate p ϭ 50 rad/sec relative to the
frame and if the frame itself rotates at the constant
rate ⍀ ϭ 30 rad/sec, compute the bending moment
M in the shaft at C which the lower portion of the
shaft exerts on the upper portion. Also compute the
kinetic energy T of the rotor. Neglect the mass of
the frame.

Ωx

Z
60°

x
y

4″

r = 3″

4″
B
p

Problem 7/124

᭤7/125 The two solid homogeneous right-circular cones,
each of mass m, are fastened together at their vertices to form a rigid unit and are spinning about their
axis of radial symmetry at the rate p ϭ 200 rev/min.
(a) Determine the ratio h/r for which the rotation
axis will not precess. (b) Sketch the space and body
cones for the case where h/r is less than the critical
ratio. (c) Sketch the space and body cones when h ϭ r
˙
and the precessional velocity is ␺ ϭ 18 rad/s.

575

p

z
x

Problems

G
x

A
z

Ω
C

X
Problem 7/126

Y

576

Chapter 7

Introduction to Three-Dimensional Dynamics of Rigid Bodies

7/12

Chapter Review

In Chapter 7 we have studied the three-dimensional dynamics of
rigid bodies. Motion in three dimensions adds considerable complexity
to the kinematic and kinetic relationships. Compared with plane motion, there is now the possibility of two additional components of the
vectors describing angular quantities such as moment, angular velocity, angular momentum, and angular acceleration. For this reason, the
full power of vector analysis becomes apparent in the study of threedimensional dynamics.
We divided our study of three-dimensional dynamics into kinematics, which is covered in Section A of the chapter, and kinetics, which is
treated in Section B.

Kinematics
We arranged our coverage of three-dimensional kinematics in order
of increasing complexity of the type of motion. These types are:
1. Translation. As in plane motion, covered in Chapter 5 (Plane
Kinematics of Rigid Bodies), any two points on a rigid body have the
same velocity and acceleration.
2. Fixed-Axis Rotation. In this case the angular-velocity vector does
not change orientation, and the expressions for the velocity and acceleration of a point are easily obtained as Eqs. 7/1 and 7/2, which
are identical in form to the corresponding plane-motion equations
in Chapter 5.
3. Parallel-Plane Motion. This case occurs when all points in a
rigid body move in planes which are parallel to a ﬁxed plane. Thus,
in each plane, the results of Chapter 5 hold.
4. Rotation about a Fixed Point. In this case, both the magnitude
and the direction of the angular-velocity vector may vary. Once the
angular acceleration is established by careful differentiation of the
angular-velocity vector, Eqs. 7/1 and 7/2 may be used to determine
the velocity and acceleration of a point.
5. General Motion. The principles of relative motion are useful in
analyzing this type of motion. Relative velocity and relative acceleration are expressed in terms of translating reference axes by Eqs.
7/4. When rotating reference axes are used, the unit vectors of the
reference system have nonzero time derivatives. Equations 7/6 express the velocity and acceleration in terms of quantities referred to
rotating axes; these equations are identical in form to the corresponding results for plane motion, Eqs. 5/12 and 5/14. Equations
7/7a and 7/7b are the expressions relating the time derivatives of a
vector as measured in a ﬁxed system and as measured relative to a
rotating system. These expressions are useful in the analysis of general motion.

Article 7/12

Kinetics
We applied momentum and energy principles to analyze threedimensional kinetics, as follows.
1. Angular Momentum. In three dimensions the vector expression
for angular momentum has numerous additional components which
are absent in plane motion. The components of angular momentum
are expressed by Eqs. 7/12 and depend on both moments and products of inertia. There is a unique set of axes, called principal axes,
for which the products of inertia are zero and the moments of inertia have stationary values. These values are called the principal moments of inertia.
2. Kinetic Energy. The kinetic energy of three-dimensional motion
can be expressed either in terms of the motion of and about the
mass center (Eq. 7/15) or in terms of the motion about a ﬁxed point
(Eq. 7/18).
3. Momentum Equations of Motion. By using the principal axes
we may simplify the momentum equations of motion to obtain
Euler’s equations, Eqs. 7/21.
4. Energy Equations. The work-energy principle for three-dimensional motion is identical to that for plane motion.
Applications
In Chapter 7 we studied two applications of special interest, namely,
parallel-plane motion and gyroscopic motion.
1. Parallel-Plane Motion. In such motion all points in a rigid body
move in planes which are parallel to a ﬁxed plane. The equations of
motion are Eqs. 7/23. These equations are useful for analyzing the
effects of dynamic imbalance in rotating machinery and in bodies
which roll along straight paths.
2. Gyroscopic Motion. This type of motion occurs whenever the axis
about which the body is spinning is itself rotating about another
axis. Common applications include inertial guidance systems, stabilizing devices, spacecraft attitude motion, and any situation in
which a rapidly spinning rotor (such as that of an aircraft engine) is
being reoriented. In the case where an external torque is present, a
˙
basic analysis can be based upon the equation M ϭ H. For the case
of torque-free motion of a body spinning about its axis of symmetry,
the axis of symmetry is found to execute a coning motion about the
ﬁxed angular-momentum vector.

Chapter Review

577

578

Chapter 7

Introduction to Three-Dimensional Dynamics of Rigid Bodies

REVIEW PROBLEMS
7/127 The cylindrical shell is rotating in space about its
geometric axis. If the axis has a slight wobble, for
what ratios of l/r will the motion be direct or retrograde precession?

parallel to the rear axle of the car. The center of
mass of the car is a distance h above the road, and
the car is rounding an unbanked level turn at a
speed v. At what speed p should the rotor turn and
in what direction to counteract completely the tendency of the car to overturn for either a right or a
left turn? The combined mass of car and rotor is m.
7/130 The wheels of the jet plane are spinning at their angular rate corresponding to a takeoff speed of 150 km/h.
The retracting mechanism operates with ␪ increasing
at the rate of 30Њ per second. Calculate the angular acceleration ␣ of the wheels for these conditions.

p
r
l

560
mm
Problem 7/127

7/128 The solid cube of mass m and side a revolves about
an axis M-M through a diagonal with an angular
velocity ␻. Write the expression for the angular
momentum H of the cube with respect to the axes
indicated.
M

z

x

y

θ

Problem 7/130

7/131 The motor turns the disk at the constant speed
p ϭ 30 rad/sec. The motor is also swiveling about the
horizontal axis B-O (y-axis) at the constant speed
˙
␪ ϭ 2 rad/sec. Simultaneously, the entire assembly is
rotating about the vertical axis C-C at the constant
rate q ϭ 8 rad/sec. For the instant when ␪ ϭ 30Њ,
determine the angular acceleration ␣ of the disk and
the acceleration a of point A at the bottom of the
disk. Axes x-y-z are attached to the motor housing,
and plane O-x0 -y is horizontal.
z

y

a

6″

x

y

p

C

a

a

r
x

O

ω

θ
x0

M
Problem 7/128

7/129 An experimental car is equipped with a gyro stabilizer to counteract completely the tendency of the
car to tip when rounding a curve (no change in normal force between tires and road). The rotor of the
gyro has a mass m0 and a radius of gyration k, and
is mounted in ﬁxed bearings on a shaft which is

B

A

q

6″
C
Problem 7/131

Article 7/12
7/132 The collars at the ends of the telescoping link AB
slide along the ﬁxed shafts shown. During an interval of motion, vA ϭ 5 in./sec and vB ϭ 2 in./sec.
Determine the vector expression for the angular
velocity ␻n of the centerline of the link for the position where yA ϭ 4 in. and yB ϭ 2 in.

Review Problems

579

7/134 The rectangular steel plate of mass 12 kg is welded
to the shaft with its plane tilted 15Њ from the plane
(x-y) normal to the shaft axis. The shaft and plate
are rotating about the ﬁxed z-axis at the rate N ϭ 300
rev/min. Determine the angular momentum HO of
the plate about the given axes and ﬁnd its kinetic
energy T.

z
yB

y

B

15°

vB
6′′

150 mm
y
3′′

150 mm

A

O
vA

x

N

yA
z

x

120
mm

Problem 7/132

7/133 The solid cone of mass m, base radius r, and altitude h is spinning at a high rate p about its own
axis and is released with its vertex O supported by
a horizontal surface. Friction is sufﬁcient to prevent the vertex from slipping in the x-y plane. Determine the direction of the precession ⍀ and the
period ␶ of one complete rotation about the vertical
z-axis.
z
θ

p

Problem 7/134

7/135 The circular disk of radius r is mounted on its shaft
which is pivoted at O so that it may rotate about
the vertical z0-axis. If the disk rolls at constant
speed without slipping and makes one complete
turn around the circle of radius R in time ␶, determine the expression for the absolute angular velocity ␻ of the disk. Use axes x-y-z which rotate
around the z0-axis. (Hint: The absolute angular velocity of the disk equals the angular velocity of the
axes plus (vectorially) the angular velocity relative
to the axes as seen by holding x-y-z ﬁxed and rotating the circular disk of radius R at the rate of 2␲/␶.)
z

r

120
mm

z0

A

y
r

h
R
O
O

x

x

y
Problem 7/133
Problem 7/135

580

Chapter 7

Introduction to Three-Dimensional Dynamics of Rigid Bodies

7/136 Determine the angular acceleration ␣ for the rolling
circular disk of Prob. 7/135. Use the results cited in
the answer for that problem.

z
z′

7/137 Determine the velocity v of point A on the disk of
Prob. 7/135 for the position shown.

O
N

7/138 Determine the acceleration a of point A on the disk
of Prob. 7/135 for the position shown.
7/139 A top consists of a ring of mass m ϭ 0.52 kg and
mean radius r ϭ 60 mm mounted on its central
pointed shaft with spokes of negligible mass. The
top is given a spin velocity of 10 000 rev/min and
released on the horizontal surface with the point O
remaining in a ﬁxed position. The axis of the top is
seen to make an angle of 15Њ with the vertical as it
precesses. Determine the number N of precession
cycles per minute. Also identify the direction of the
precession and sketch the body and space cones.
Z

p

β

y′

y

C

10″

4″
x

Problem 7/140

7/141 Rework Prob. 7/140 if ␤, instead of being constant at
20Њ, is increasing at the steady rate of 120 rev/min.
Find the angular momentum HO of the disk for the
instant when ␤ ϭ 20Њ. Also compute the kinetic
energy T of the disk. Is T dependent on ␤?
7/142 The dynamic imbalance of a certain crankshaft is
approximated by the physical model shown, where
the shaft carries three small 1.5-lb spheres attached by rods of negligible mass. If the shaft rotates at the constant speed of 1200 rev/min,
calculate the forces RA and RB acting on the bearings. Neglect the gravitational forces.

15°

60
mm
80 mm

z

B
3
x

10 000 rev/min

8′′

2

O

8′′
A
8′′

1
Problem 7/139

7/140 The uniform circular disk of 4-in. radius and small
thickness weighs 8 lb and is spinning about its yЈaxis at the rate N ϭ 300 rev/min with its plane of
rotation tilted at a constant angle ␤ ϭ 20Њ from the
vertical x-z plane. Simultaneously, the assembly
rotates about the ﬁxed z-axis at the rate p ϭ 60
rev/min. Calculate the angular momentum HO of the
disk alone about the origin O of the x-y-z coordinates. Also calculate the kinetic energy T of the disk.

120°
3

8′′

6′′

y
120°

120°
1
End view

Problem 7/142

2

Article 7/12
7/143 Each of the two right-angle bent rods weighs 2.80 lb
and is parallel to the horizontal x-y plane. The
rods are welded to the vertical shaft, which rotates about the z-axis with a constant angular
speed N ϭ 1200 rev/min. Calculate the bending
moment M in the shaft at its base O.

Review Problems

581

z

N
150 mm

z
6″
75 mm

6″

150 mm

6″
75 mm

Ν

O

y

x
6″
6″

Problem 7/144

x

6″
y
O

Problem 7/143

7/144 Each of the quarter-circular plates has a mass of
2 kg and is secured to the vertical shaft mounted
in the fixed bearing at O. Calculate the magnitude M of the bending moment in the shaft at O
for a constant rotational speed N ϭ 300 rev/min.
Treat the plates as exact quarter-circular shapes.

7/145 Calculate the bending moment M in the shaft at O
for the rotating assembly of Prob. 7/144 as it starts
from rest with an initial angular acceleration of
200 rad/s2.
᭤7/146 The half-cylindrical shell of mass m, radius r, and
length b revolves about one edge along the z-axis
with a constant rate ␻ as shown. Determine the angular momentum H of the shell with respect to the x-y-z
axes.

z

y

r

x

ω

b

Problem 7/146

This illustration shows the elements of the left-front suspension on an all-wheel-drive automobile. The spring and
shock absorber are coaxial in this McPherson-strut type of suspension.
Courtesy of David R. Kraige

Vibration and
Time Response

8

CHAPTER OUTLINE
8/1 Introduction
8/2 Free Vibration of Particles
8/3 Forced Vibration of Particles
8/4 Vibration of Rigid Bodies
8/5 Energy Methods
8/6 Chapter Review

8/1

Introduction

An important and special class of problems in dynamics concerns
the linear and angular motions of bodies which oscillate or otherwise respond to applied disturbances in the presence of restoring forces. A few
examples of this class of dynamics problems are the response of an engineering structure to earthquakes, the vibration of an unbalanced rotating machine, the time response of the plucked string of a musical
instrument, the wind-induced vibration of power lines, and the ﬂutter of
aircraft wings. In many cases, excessive vibration levels must be reduced to accommodate material limitations or human factors.
In the analysis of every engineering problem, we must represent the
system under scrutiny by a physical model. We may often represent a
continuous or distributed-parameter system (one in which the mass and
spring elements are continuously spread over space) by a discrete or
lumped-parameter model (one in which the mass and spring elements
are separate and concentrated). The resulting simpliﬁed model is especially accurate when some portions of a continuous system are relatively
massive in comparison with other portions. For example, the physical
model of a ship propeller shaft is often assumed to be a massless but
twistable rod with a disk rigidly attached to each end—one disk representing the turbine and the other representing the propeller. As a second example, we observe that the mass of springs may often be
neglected in comparison with that of attached bodies.
Not every system is reducible to a discrete model. For example, the
transverse vibration of a diving board after the departure of the diver is
583

584

Chapter 8

Vibration and Time Response

a somewhat difﬁcult problem of distributed-parameter vibration. In this
chapter, we will begin the study of discrete systems, limiting our discussion to those whose conﬁgurations may be described with one displacement variable. Such systems are said to possess one degree of freedom.
For a more detailed study which includes the treatment of two or more
degrees of freedom and continuous systems, you should consult one of
the many textbooks devoted solely to the subject of vibrations.
The remainder of Chapter 8 is divided into four sections: Article
8/2 treats the free vibration of particles and Art. 8/3 introduces the
forced vibration of particles. Each of these two articles is subdivided
into undamped- and damped-motion categories. In Art. 8/4 we discuss
the vibration of rigid bodies. Finally, an energy approach to the solution of vibration problems is presented in Art. 8/5.
The topic of vibrations is a direct application of the principles of kinetics as developed in Chapters 3 and 6. In particular, construction of a
complete free-body diagram drawn for an arbitrary positive value of the
displacement variable, followed by application of the appropriate governing equations of dynamics, will yield the equation of motion. From
this equation of motion, which is a second-order ordinary differential
equation, you can obtain all information of interest, such as the motion
frequency, period, or the motion itself as a function of time.

8/2

When a spring-mounted body is disturbed from its equilibrium position, its ensuing motion in the absence of any imposed external forces is
termed free vibration. In every actual case of free vibration, there exists
some retarding or damping force which tends to diminish the motion.
Common damping forces are those due to mechanical and ﬂuid friction.
In this article we ﬁrst consider the ideal case where the damping forces
are small enough to be neglected. Then we treat the case where the
damping is appreciable and must be accounted for.

k
m

Equilibrium
position

x

Free Vibration of Particles

mg

kx
N
(a)
Fs

Hard
Linear Fs = kx
Soft
x

(b)

Figure 8/1

Equation of Motion for Undamped Free Vibration
We begin by considering the horizontal vibration of the simple
frictionless spring-mass system of Fig. 8/1a. Note that the variable x
denotes the displacement of the mass from the equilibrium position,
which, for this system, is also the position of zero spring deflection.
Figure 8/1b shows a plot of the force Fs necessary to deflect the spring
versus the corresponding spring deflection for three types of springs.
Although nonlinear hard and soft springs are useful in some applications, we will restrict our attention to the linear spring. Such a spring
exerts a restoring force Ϫkx on the mass—that is, when the mass is
displaced to the right, the spring force is to the left, and vice versa.
We must be careful to distinguish between the forces of magnitude Fs
which must be applied to both ends of the massless spring to cause
tension or compression and the force F ϭ Ϫkx of equal magnitude
which the spring exerts on the mass. The constant of proportionality
k is called the spring constant, modulus, or stiffness and has the units
N/m or lb/ft.

Article 8/2

The equation of motion for the body of Fig. 8/1a is obtained by ﬁrst
drawing its free-body diagram. Applying Newton’s second law in the
form ΣFx ϭ mx gives
¨
Ϫkx ϭ mx
¨

or

mx ϩ kx ϭ 0
¨

(8/1)

The oscillation of a mass subjected to a linear restoring force as described by this equation is called simple harmonic motion and is characterized by acceleration which is proportional to the displacement but of
opposite sign. Equation 8/1 is normally written as
x
¨ ϩ ␻ n 2x ϭ 0

(8/2)

␻n ϭ Ίk/m

(8/3)

where

is a convenient substitution whose physical signiﬁcance will be clariﬁed
shortly.

Solution for Undamped Free Vibration
Because we anticipate an oscillatory motion, we look for a solution
which gives x as a periodic function of time. Thus, a logical choice is
x ϭ A cos ␻nt ϩ B sin ␻nt

(8/4)

x ϭ C sin (␻nt ϩ ␺)

(8/5)

or, alternatively,

Direct substitution of these expressions into Eq. 8/2 veriﬁes that each
expression is a valid solution to the equation of motion. We determine
the constants A and B, or C and ␺, from knowledge of the initial disx
placement x0 and initial velocity ˙0 of the mass. For example, if we work
x
with the solution form of Eq. 8/4 and evaluate x and ˙ at time t ϭ 0, we
obtain
x0 ϭ A

and

x
˙0 ϭ B␻n

Substitution of these values of A and B into Eq. 8/4 yields
x ϭ x0 cos ␻nt ϩ

x
˙0
sin ␻nt
␻n

(8/6)

The constants C and ␺ of Eq. 8/5 can be determined in terms of
given initial conditions in a similar manner. Evaluation of Eq. 8/5 and
its ﬁrst time derivative at t ϭ 0 gives
x0 ϭ C sin ␺

and

x
˙0 ϭ C␻n cos ␺

Free Vibration of Particles

585

586

Chapter 8

Vibration and Time Response

Solving for C and ␺ yields
C ϭ Ίx02 ϩ (x 0/␻n)2
˙

␺ ϭ tanϪ1(x0␻n/x 0)
˙

Substitution of these values into Eq. 8/5 gives
x ϭ Ίx02 ϩ (x 0/␻n)2 sin [␻nt ϩ tanϪ1(x0␻n/x 0)]
˙
˙

(8/7)

Equations 8/6 and 8/7 represent two different mathematical expressions
for the same time-dependent motion. We observe that C ϭ ΊA2 ϩ B2
and ␺ ϭ tanϪ1(A/B).

Graphical Representation of Motion
The motion may be represented graphically, Fig. 8/2, where x is
seen to be the projection onto a vertical axis of the rotating vector of
length C. The vector rotates at the constant angular velocity ␻n ϭ Ίk/m,
which is called the natural circular frequency and has the units radians
per second. The number of complete cycles per unit time is the natural
frequency ƒn ϭ ␻n/2␲ and is expressed in hertz (1 hertz (Hz) ϭ 1 cycle
per second). The time required for one complete motion cycle (one rotation of the reference vector) is the period of the motion and is given by
␶ ϭ 1/ƒn ϭ 2␲/␻n.
+x

x

C

ω nt
ψ

A

B
ω nt

2␲
τ = —–
ωn

C
x
x0
0

0

t

−C
−x

Figure 8/2
We also see from the ﬁgure that x is the sum of the projections onto
the vertical axis of two perpendicular vectors whose magnitudes are A
and B and whose vector sum C is the amplitude. Vectors A, B, and C rotate together with the constant angular velocity ␻n. Thus, as we have already seen, C ϭ ΊA2 ϩ B2 and ␺ ϭ tanϪ1(A/B).

Equilibrium Position as Reference
As a further note on the free undamped vibration of particles, we
see that, if the system of Fig. 8/1a is rotated 90Њ clockwise to obtain the
system of Fig. 8/3 where the motion is vertical rather than horizontal,

Article 8/2

Free Vibration of Particles

the equation of motion (and therefore all system properties) is unchanged if we continue to deﬁne x as the displacement from the equilibrium position. The equilibrium position now involves a nonzero spring
deﬂection ␦st. From the free-body diagram of Fig. 8/3, Newton’s second
law gives
Ϫk(␦st ϩ x) ϩ mg ϭ mx
¨

587

k

δ st

k(δ st + x)
x

Equilibrium
position

m

At the equilibrium position x ϭ 0, the force sum must be zero, so that

m

Ϫk␦st ϩ mg ϭ 0

mg

Figure 8/3

Thus, we see that the pair of forces Ϫk␦st and mg on the left side of the
motion equation cancel, giving
mx ϩ kx ϭ 0
¨
which is identical to Eq. 8/1.
The lesson here is that by defining the displacement variable to
be zero at equilibrium rather than at the position of zero spring deflection, we may ignore the equal and opposite forces associated with
equilibrium.*

Equation of Motion for Damped Free Vibration
Every mechanical system possesses some inherent degree of friction, which dissipates mechanical energy. Precise mathematical models
of the dissipative friction forces are usually complex. The dashpot or viscous damper is a device intentionally added to systems for the purpose
of limiting or retarding vibration. It consists of a cylinder ﬁlled with a
viscous ﬂuid and a piston with holes or other passages by which the ﬂuid
can ﬂow from one side of the piston to the other. Simple dashpots
arranged as shown schematically in Fig. 8/4a exert a force Fd whose
magnitude is proportional to the velocity of the mass, as depicted in Fig.
8/4b. The constant of proportionality c is called the viscous damping coefﬁcient and has units of N ⅐ s/m or lb-sec/ft. The direction of the dampx
ing force as applied to the mass is opposite that of the velocity ˙. Thus,
the force on the mass is Ϫcx .
˙
Complex dashpots with internal ﬂow-rate-dependent one-way
valves can produce different damping coefﬁcients in extension and in
compression; nonlinear characteristics are also possible. We will restrict
our attention to the simple linear dashpot.
The equation of motion for the body with damping is determined
from the free-body diagram as shown in Fig. 8/4a. Newton’s second law
gives
Ϫkx Ϫ cx ϭ mx
˙
¨

or

mx ϩ cx ϩ kx ϭ 0
¨
˙

k
m

c

Equilibrium
position

x

kx
·
cx

N
(a)

Fd

·
x

(8/8)
(b)

*For nonlinear systems, all forces, including the static forces associated with equilibrium,
should be included in the analysis.

mg

Figure 8/4

588

Chapter 8

Vibration and Time Response

In addition to the substitution ␻n ϭ Ίk/m, it is convenient, for reasons
which will shortly become evident, to introduce the combination of
constants
␨ ϭ c/(2m␻n)
The quantity ␨ (zeta) is called the viscous damping factor or damping
ratio and is a measure of the severity of the damping. You should verify
that ␨ is nondimensional. Equation 8/8 may now be written as
x
x
¨ ϩ 2␨␻n˙ ϩ ␻n2x ϭ 0

(8/9)

Solution for Damped Free Vibration
In order to solve the equation of motion, Eq. 8/9, we assume solutions of the form
x ϭ Ae ␭t
Substitution into Eq. 8/9 yields
␭2 ϩ 2␨␻n␭ ϩ ␻n2 ϭ 0
which is called the characteristic equation. Its roots are
␭1 ϭ ␻n(Ϫ␨ ϩ Ί␨2 Ϫ 1)

␭2 ϭ ␻n(Ϫ␨ Ϫ Ί␨2 Ϫ1)

Linear systems have the property of superposition, which means that
the general solution is the sum of the individual solutions each of which
corresponds to one root of the characteristic equation. Thus, the general
solution is
x ϭ A1e ␭1t ϩ A2 e ␭2t
ϭ A1e(Ϫ␨ϩΊ␨ Ϫ1)␻nt ϩ A2e(Ϫ␨ϪΊ␨ Ϫ1)␻nt
2

2

(8/10)

Categories of Damped Motion
Because 0 Յ ␨ Յ ȍ, the radicand (␨2 Ϫ 1) may be positive, negative,
or even zero, giving rise to the following three categories of damped
motion:
I. ␨ Ͼ 1 (overdamped). The roots ␭1 and ␭2 are distinct, real, and
negative numbers. The motion as given by Eq. 8/10 decays so
that x approaches zero for large values of time t. There is no oscillation and therefore no period associated with the motion.
II. ␨ ϭ 1 (critically damped). The roots ␭1 and ␭2 are equal, real,
and negative numbers (␭1 ϭ ␭2 ϭ Ϫ␻n). The solution to the differential equation for the special case of equal roots is given by
x ϭ (A1 ϩ A2t)eϪ␻nt

Article 8/2
x, mm
30

Conditions: m = 1 kg, k = 9 N/m
·
x0 = 30 mm, x0 = 0

20

c = 15 N·s/m (ζ = 2.5), overdamped
c = 6 N·s/m (ζ = 1), critically damped

10

0
0

1

2

3

4

t, s

Figure 8/5

Again, the motion decays with x approaching zero for large time,
and the motion is nonperiodic. A critically damped system, when
excited with an initial velocity or displacement (or both), will approach equilibrium faster than will an overdamped system. Figure 8/5 depicts actual responses for both an overdamped and a
critically damped system to an initial displacement x0 and no inix
tial velocity ( ˙0 ϭ 0).
III. ␨ Ͻ 1 (underdamped). Noting that the radicand (␨2 Ϫ 1) is
negative and recalling that e(aϩb) ϭ eaeb, we may rewrite Eq.
8/10 as
x ϭ {A1eiΊ1Ϫ␨ ␻nt ϩ A2eϪiΊ1Ϫ␨ ␻nt}eϪ␨␻nt
2

2

where i ϭ ΊϪ1. It is convenient to let a new variable ␻d represent the combination ␻nΊ1 Ϫ ␨2. Thus,
x ϭ {A1ei␻dt ϩ A2eϪi␻dt}eϪ␨␻nt
Use of the Euler formula eϮix ϭ cos x Ϯ i sin x allows the previous equation to be written as
x ϭ {A1(cos ␻dt ϩ i sin ␻dt) ϩ A2(cos ␻dt Ϫ i sin ␻dt)}eϪ␨␻nt
ϭ {(A1 ϩ A2) cos ␻dt ϩ i(A1 Ϫ A2) sin ␻dt}eϪ␨␻nt
ϭ {A3 cos ␻dt ϩ A4 sin ␻dt}eϪ␨␻nt

(8/11)

where A3 ϭ (A1 ϩ A2) and A4 ϭ i(A1 Ϫ A2). We have shown with
Eqs. 8/4 and 8/5 that the sum of two equal-frequency harmonics, such as those in the braces of Eq. 8/11, can be replaced by a
single trigonometric function which involves a phase angle.
Thus, Eq. 8/11 can be written as
x ϭ {C sin (␻dt ϩ ␺)}eϪ␨␻nt
or
x ϭ CeϪ␨␻nt sin (␻dt ϩ ␺)

(8/12)

Free Vibration of Particles

589

590

Chapter 8

Vibration and Time Response

x, mm
Conditions: m = 1 kg, k = 36 N/m
c = 1 N·s /m (ζ = 0.0833)
·
x0 = 30 mm, x0 = 0
–ζ ωnt
Ce

30
20

Equation 8/12 represents an exponentially decreasing harmonic
function, as shown in Fig. 8/6 for speciﬁc numerical values. The
frequency
␻d ϭ ␻nΊ1 Ϫ ␨2

τd

10
0
0
–10

1

3

2

4 t, s

It is important to note that the expressions developed for the constants C and ␺ in terms of initial conditions for the case of no damping
are not valid for the case of damping. To ﬁnd C and ␺ if damping is present, you must begin anew, setting the general displacement expression
of Eq. 8/12 and its ﬁrst time derivative, both evaluated at time t ϭ 0,
x
equal to the initial displacement x0 and initial velocity ˙0, respectively.

– Ce – ζ ωnt

–20

is called the damped natural frequency. The damped period is
given by ␶d ϭ 2␲/␻d ϭ 2␲/(␻nΊ1 Ϫ ␨2).

–30

Figure 8/6

Determination of Damping by Experiment
We often need to experimentally determine the value of the damping ratio ␨ for an underdamped system. The usual reason is that the
value of the viscous damping coefﬁcient c is not otherwise well known.
To determine the damping, we may excite the system by initial conditions and obtain a plot of the displacement x versus time t, such as that
shown schematically in Fig. 8/7. We then measure two successive amplitudes x1 and x2 a full cycle apart and compute their ratio

x
2␲
τd = —
ωd

x1
x2
x1

t2

CeϪ␨␻nt1
ϭ e␨␻n␶d
CeϪ␨␻n(t1ϩ␶d)

The logarithmic decrement ␦ is deﬁned as

x2
t1

ϭ

t

␦ ϭ ln

΂x ΃ ϭ ␨␻ ␶
x1
2

x = Ce– ζω nt sin (ωdt +ψ )

n d

2␲␨
2␲
ϭ
2
␻nΊ1 Ϫ ␨
Ί1 Ϫ ␨2

From this equation, we may solve for ␨ and obtain
␨ϭ

Figure 8/7

ϭ ␨␻n

␦
Ί(2␲)2 ϩ ␦2

For a small damping ratio, x1 ഡ x2 and ␦ ϽϽ 1, so that ␨ ഡ ␦/2␲. If x1
and x2 are so close in value that experimental distinction between them
is impractical, the above analysis may be modiﬁed by using two observed amplitudes which are n cycles apart.

Article 8/2

Free Vibration of Particles

591

SAMPLE PROBLEM 8/1
A body weighing 25 lb is suspended from a spring of constant k ϭ 160 lb/ft.
At time t ϭ 0, it has a downward velocity of 2 ft/sec as it passes through the position of static equilibrium. Determine

k = 160 lb /ft

(a) the static spring deﬂection ␦st
(b) the natural frequency of the system in both rad/sec (␻n) and
cycles/sec ( ƒn )
(c) the system period ␶

W = 25 lb

(d) the displacement x as a function of time, where x is measured from the
position of static equilibrium

Fs = kδst

(e) the maximum velocity vmax attained by the mass

Solution.

k(δ st + x)

δst

( ƒ) the maximum acceleration amax attained by the mass.

Equilibrium
position

kx

x

≡

(a) From the spring relationship Fs ϭ kx, we see that at equilibrium
mg

ᕡ

mg
25
ϭ 0.1562 ft or 1.875 in.
␦st ϭ
ϭ
160
k

mg ϭ k␦st

mg

Ans.
Helpful Hints

(b)

Ans.
Ans.

␶ϭ

(c)

ᕢ

1
1
ϭ 0.438 sec
ϭ
ƒn 2.28

Ans.

(d) From Eq. 8/6:
x ϭ x0 cos ␻nt ϩ

x
˙0
␻n

ᕡ You should always exercise extreme
caution in the matter of units. In the
subject of vibrations, it is quite easy
to commit errors due to mixing of
feet and inches, cycles and radians,
and other pairs which frequently
enter the calculations.

ᕢ Recall that when we refer the mosin ␻nt

ϭ (0) cos 14.36t ϩ

2
sin 14.36t
14.36

ϭ 0.1393 sin 14.36t

Ans.

As an exercise, let us determine x from the alternative Eq. 8/7:

(e) The velocity is ˙ ϭ 14.36(0.1393) cos 14.36t ϭ 2 cos 14.36t. Because the
x
cosine function cannot be greater than 1 or less than Ϫ1, the maximum velocity
vmax is 2 ft/sec, which, in this case, is the initial velocity.
Ans.
( ƒ) The acceleration is
x
¨ ϭ Ϫ14.36(2) sin 14.36t ϭ Ϫ28.7 sin 14.36t
The maximum acceleration amax is 28.7 ft/sec2.

Ans.

tion to the position of static equilibrium, the equation of motion, and
therefore its solution, for the present system is identical to that for
the horizontally vibrating system.

592

Chapter 8

Vibration and Time Response

SAMPLE PROBLEM 8/2
x

The 8-kg body is moved 0.2 m to the right of the equilibrium position and
released from rest at time t ϭ 0. Determine its displacement at time t ϭ 2 s. The
viscous damping coefﬁcient c is 20 N ⅐ s/m, and the spring stiffness k is 32 N/m.

c
8 kg

Solution.

We must ﬁrst determine whether the system is underdamped, critically damped, or overdamped. For that purpose, we compute the damping ratio ␨.
␻n ϭ Ίk/m ϭ Ί32/8 ϭ 2 rad/s

␨ϭ

c
20
ϭ
ϭ 0.625
2m␻n 2(8)(2)

k
Equilibrium
position

Since ␨ Ͻ 1, the system is underdamped. The damped natural frequency is
␻d ϭ ␻nΊ1 Ϫ ␨2 ϭ 2Ί1 Ϫ (0.625)2 ϭ 1.561 rad/s. The motion is given by Eq. 8/12
and is
x ϭ Ce

Ϫ␨␻nt

sin (␻dt ϩ ␺) ϭ Ce

Ϫ1.25t

x
mg

·
·
cx = 20x

sin (1.561t ϩ ␺)

kx = 32x

The velocity is then
x
˙ ϭ Ϫ1.25CeϪ1.25t sin (1.561t ϩ ␺) ϩ 1.561CeϪ1.25t cos (1.561t ϩ ␺)

N

Evaluating the displacement and velocity at time t ϭ 0 gives
x0 ϭ C sin ␺ ϭ 0.2

x
˙0 ϭ Ϫ1.25C sin ␺ ϩ 1.561C cos ␺ ϭ 0

Helpful Hint

Solving the two equations for C and ␺ yields C ϭ 0.256 m and ␺ ϭ 0.896 rad.
Therefore, the displacement in meters is
x ϭ 0.256eϪ1.25t sin (1.561t ϩ 0.896)

ᕡ Evaluation for time t ϭ 2 s gives x2 ϭ Ϫ0.01616 m.

Ans.

ᕡ We note that the exponential factor

eϪ1.25t is 0.0821 at t ϭ 2 s. Thus,
␨ ϭ 0.625 represents severe damping, although the motion is still
oscillatory.

SAMPLE PROBLEM 8/3
The two ﬁxed counterrotating pulleys are driven at the same angular speed
␻0. A round bar is placed off center on the pulleys as shown. Determine the natural frequency of the resulting bar motion. The coefﬁcient of kinetic friction between the bar and pulleys is ␮k.

Solution.

The free-body diagram of the bar is constructed for an arbitrary displacement x from the central position as shown. The governing equations are

[ΣFx ϭ mx ]
¨

NA ϩ NB Ϫ mg ϭ 0

ᕡ [ΣMA ϭ 0]

aNBϪ

x
¨ϩ

x

a
––
2

G
mg

B

μk NB
NB

ᕡ Because the bar is slender and does

2␮k g
a xϭ0

1
Ί2␮k g/a
2␲

y

Helpful Hints
not rotate, the use of a moment
equilibrium equation is justiﬁed.

We recognize the form of this equation as that of Eq. 8/2, so that the natural frequency in radians per second is ␻n ϭ Ί2␮k g/a and the natural frequency in cycles per second is
ƒn ϭ

A

NA

Eliminating NA and NB from the ﬁrst equation yields

ᕢ

Central
position
a
––
2

μk NA

΂a ϩ x΃mg ϭ 0
2

ω0

a

␮k NA Ϫ ␮k NB ϭ mx
¨

[ΣFy ϭ 0]

ω0

Ans.

ᕢ We note that the angular speed ␻0
does not enter the equation of motion. The reason for this is our assumption that the kinetic friction
force does not depend on the relative
velocity at the contacting surface.

Article 8/2

PROBLEMS
(Unless otherwise indicated, all motion variables are referred to the equilibrium position.)

Problems

593

8/5 For the spring-mass system shown, determine the
static defection ␦st, the system period ␶, and the maximum velocity vmax which result if the cylinder is displaced 0.1 m downward from its equilibrium position
and released.

Undamped, Free Vibrations
8/1 When a 3-kg collar is placed upon the pan which is
attached to the spring of unknown constant, the additional static deﬂection of the pan is observed to be
40 mm. Determine the spring constant k in N/m, lb/in.,
and lb/ft.

k = 144 N/m

Equilibrium
position

m = 4 kg

y

k

Problem 8/5

8/6 The cylinder of the system of Prob. 8/5 is displaced
0.1 m downward from its equilibrium position and is
released at time t ϭ 0. Determine the displacement y
and the velocity v when t ϭ 3 s. What is the maximum
acceleration?

3 kg
40 mm

Problem 8/1

8/2 Determine the natural frequency of the spring-mass
system in both rad/sec and cycles/sec (Hz).

8/7 The vertical plunger has a mass of 2.5 kg and is supported by the two springs, which are always in compression. Calculate the natural frequency ƒn of
vibration of the plunger if it is deﬂected from the
equilibrium position and released from rest. Friction
in the guide is negligible.

x
k = 24 lb/in.
64.4 lb
k1 = 3.6 kN/m
Fixed

Problem 8/2

8/3 For the system of Prob. 8/2, determine the displacement x of the mass as a function of time if the mass is
released from rest at time t ϭ 0 from a position 2 in.
to the right of the equilibrium position.
8/4 For the system of Prob. 8/2, determine the displacement x of the mass as a function of time if the mass is
released at time t ϭ 0 from a position 2 in. to the left
of the equilibrium position with an initial velocity of
7 in./sec to the right. Determine the amplitude C of
the motion.

k2 = 1.8 kN/m

2.5 kg
Problem 8/7

594

Chapter 8

Vibration and Time Response

8/8 If the 100-kg mass has a downward velocity of 0.5 m/s
as it passes through its equilibrium position, calculate
the magnitude amax of its maximum acceleration.
Each of the two springs has a stiffness k ϭ 180 kN/m.

k

Electromagnet

k
Problem 8/10
100 kg

Problem 8/8

8/9 Calculate the natural frequency ƒn of vertical oscillation of the spring-loaded cylinder when it is set into
motion. Both springs are in tension at all times.
k = 3000 N/m

8/11 A conventional spring scale registers the normal
force which it exerts on the feet of the person being
weighed. In the orbital environment aboard the spaceshuttle orbiter, such normal forces do not exist. Use
your knowledge of vibration and explain how an astronaut might “weigh” himself or herself.
8/12 During the design of the spring-support system for
the 4000-kg weighing platform, it is decided that the
frequency of free vertical vibration in the unloaded
condition shall not exceed 3 cycles per second.
(a) Determine the maximum acceptable spring constant k for each of the three identical springs. (b) For
this spring constant, what would be the natural frequency ƒn of vertical vibration of the platform loaded
by the 40-Mg truck?

10 kg

4000 kg
k

k

k

k = 3000 N/m
Problem 8/9

Problem 8/12

8/10 An old car being moved by a magnetic crane pickup
is dropped from a short distance above the ground.
Neglect any damping effects of its worn-out shock
absorbers and calculate the natural frequency ƒn in
cycles per second (Hz) of the vertical vibration which
occurs after impact with the ground. Each of the
four springs on the 1000-kg car has a constant of
17.5 kN/m. Because the center of mass is located
midway between the axles and the car is level when
dropped, there is no rotational motion. State any
assumptions.

8/13 Replace the springs in each of the two cases shown
by a single spring of stiffness k (equivalent spring
stiffness) which will cause each mass to vibrate with
its original frequency.

k1

k2

k2

k1

(a)

(b)
Problem 8/13

Article 8/2
8/14 With the assumption of no slipping, determine the
mass m of the block which must be placed on the top
of the 6-kg cart in order that the system period be
0.75 s. What is the minimum coefﬁcient ␮s of static
friction for which the block will not slip relative to
the cart if the cart is displaced 50 mm from the equilibrium position and released?
m

Problems

595

8/17 A small particle of mass m is attached to two highly
tensioned wires as shown. Determine the system
natural frequency ␻n for small vertical oscillations if
the tension T in both wires is assumed to be constant. Is the calculation of the small static deﬂection
of the particle necessary?
m

μs

600 N/m
6 kg

l

l
Problem 8/17

Problem 8/14

8/15 An energy-absorbing car bumper with its springs initially undeformed has an equivalent spring constant of
3000 lb/in. If the 2500-lb car approaches a massive
wall with a speed of 5 mi/hr, determine (a) the velocity
v of the car as a function of time during contact with
the wall, where t ϭ 0 is the beginning of the impact,
and (b) the maximum deﬂection xmax of the bumper.

8/18 The cylindrical buoy ﬂoats in salt water (density
1030 kg/m3) and has a mass of 800 kg with a low center of mass to keep it stable in the upright position.
Determine the frequency ƒn of vertical oscillation of
the buoy. Assume that the water level remains undisturbed adjacent to the buoy.
0.6 m

5 mi/hr

Problem 8/18

Problem 8/15

8/16 A 120-lb woman stands in the center of an endsupported board and causes a midspan deﬂection of
0.9 in. If she ﬂexes her kness slightly in order to
cause a vertical vibration, what is the frequency ƒn
of the motion? Assume elastic response of the board
and neglect its relatively small mass.

8/19 Shown in the ﬁgure is a model of a one-story building. The bar of mass m is supported by two light elastic upright columns whose upper and lower ends are
ﬁxed against rotation. For each column, if a force P
and corresponding moment M were applied as shown
in the right-hand part of the ﬁgure, the deﬂection ␦
would be given by ␦ ϭ PL3/12EI, where L is the effective column length, E is Young’s modulus, and I is
the area moment of inertia of the column cross section with respect to its neutral axis. Determine the
natural frequency of horizontal oscillation of the bar
when the columns bend as shown in the ﬁgure.
δ

m

M
P

0.9″
L

k

k
Ground level

Problem 8/16
Problem 8/19

596

Chapter 8

Vibration and Time Response

8/20 A 3-kg piece of putty is dropped 2 m onto the initially
stationary 28-kg block, which is supported by four
springs, each of which has a constant k ϭ 800 N/m.
Determine the displacement x as a function of time
during the resulting vibration, where x is measured
from the initial position of the block as shown.

m

k

3 kg
b

b

c

c

Problem 8/22
2m

8/23 Calculate the natural circular frequency ␻n of the
system shown in the ﬁgure. The mass and friction of
the pulleys are negligible.
28 kg
k

x

k

k

m
θ

Problem 8/20

8/21 Calculate the frequency ƒn of vertical oscillation of
the 50-lb block when it is set in motion. Each spring
has a stiffness of 6 lb/in. Neglect the mass of the
pulleys.
m

k

Problem 8/23

k

50 lb

8/24 Derive the differential equation of motion for the
system shown in terms of the variable x1. The mass
of the linkage is negligible. State the natural frequency ␻nЈ in rad/s for the case k1 ϭ k2 ϭ k and
m1 ϭ m2 ϭ m. Assume small oscillations throughout.
x1

8/22 The weighing platform has a mass m and is connected to the spring of stiffness k by the system of
levers shown. Derive the differential equation for
small vertical oscillations of the platform and ﬁnd
the period ␶. Designate y as the platform displacement from the equilibrium position and neglect the
mass of the levers.

k1

A

Problem 8/21

m1

a
O
x2

b

k2
m2
B

Problem 8/24

Article 8/2

Damped, Free Vibrations
8/25 Determine the value of the damping ratio ␨ for the
simple spring-mass-dashpot system shown.
x

c = 42 N·s/m

2 kg

Problems

597

8/30 The 2.5-kg spring-supported cylinder is set into free
vertical vibration and is observed to have a period of
0.75 s in part (a) of the ﬁgure. The system is then
completely immersed in an oil bath in part (b) of the
ﬁgure, and the cylinder is displaced from its equilibrium position and released. Viscous damping ensues,
and the ratio of two successive positive-displacement
amplitudes is 4. Calculate the viscous damping ratio
␨, the viscous damping constant c, and the equivalent spring constant k.

k = 392 N/m

Problem 8/25
Oil

8/26 The period ␶d of damped linear oscillation for a certain 1-kg mass is 0.3 s. If the stiffness of the supporting linear spring is 800 N/m, calculate the
damping coefﬁcient c.

2.5
kg

2.5
kg

(a)

(b)

8/27 Viscous damping is added to an initially undamped
spring-mass system. For what value of the damping
ratio ␨ will the damped natural frequency ␻d be
equal to 90 percent of the natural frequency of the
original undamped system?
8/28 The addition of damping to an undamped springmass system causes its period to increase by 25 percent. Determine the damping ratio ␨.
8/29 Determine the value of the viscous damping coefﬁcient c for which the system shown is critically
damped.

200 lb/in.

Problem 8/30

8/31 The ﬁgure represents the measured displacementtime relationship for a vibration with small damping
where it is impractical to achieve accurate results by
measuring the nearly equal amplitudes of two successive cycles. Modify the expression for the viscous
damping factor ␨ based on the measured amplitudes
x0 and xN which are N cycles apart.
x

80 lb
x0
xN
c

t0

t1

t2

Problem 8/29
Problem 8/31

tN

tN+1

t

598

Chapter 8

Vibration and Time Response

8/32 The 2-kg mass of Prob. 8/25 is released from rest at
a distance x0 to the right of the equilibrium position.
Determine the displacement x as a function of time t,
where t ϭ 0 is the time of release.
8/33 A damped spring-mass system is released from rest
from a positive initial displacement x0. If the succeeding maximum positive displacement is x0/2, determine the damping ratio ␨ of the system.

8/36 The system shown is released from rest from an initial
position x0. Determine the overshoot displacement x1.
Assume translational motion in the x-direction.
x
x0
k = 108 N/m

c = 18 N·s/m

m = 3 kg

x
x

x0
t

0
0

x1

x0 /2
Problem 8/36
t

0
0

8/37 The mass of a given critically damped system is released at time t ϭ 0 from the position x0 Ͼ 0 with a
negative initial velocity. Determine the critical value
(x 0)c of the initial velocity below which the mass will
˙
pass through the equilibrium position.
Problem 8/33

8/34 Determine the values of the viscous damping coefﬁcient c for which the system has a damping ratio of
(a) 0.5 and (b) 1.5.

8/38 The mass of the system shown is released from rest at
x0 ϭ 6 in. when t ϭ 0. Determine the displacement x at
t ϭ 0.5 sec if (a) c ϭ 12 lb-sec/ft and (b) c ϭ 18 lb-sec/ft.
x

.

b/in

15 l

c

c

W = 96.6 lb

b
40 l

k = 1 lb/in.

c
Problem 8/38

20°

Problem 8/34

8/35 Further design reﬁnement for the weighing platform
of Prob. 8/12 is shown here where two viscous
dampers are to be added to limit the ratio of successive positive amplitudes of vertical vibration in the
unloaded condition to 4. Determine the necessary
viscous damping coefﬁcient c for each of the dampers.

k

800 ft/sec
20°

k

4000 kg
k

8/39 The cannon ﬁres a 10-lb cannonball with an absolute
velocity of 800 ft/sec at 20Њ to the horizontal. The
combined weight of the cannon and its cart is 1610 lb.
If the recoil mechanism consists of the spring of constant k ϭ 150 lb/in. and the damper with viscous
coefﬁcient c ϭ 600 lb-sec/ft, determine the maximum
recoil deﬂection xmax of the cannon unit.

k

c

m

c
c

Problem 8/35

Problem 8/39

Article 8/2

8/40 The owner of a 3400-lb pickup truck tests the action
of his rear-wheel shock absorbers by applying a
steady 100-lb force to the rear bumper and measuring a static deﬂection of 3 in. Upon sudden release of
the force, the bumper rises and then falls to a maximum of 1 in. below the unloaded equilibrium posi2
tion of the bumper on the ﬁrst rebound. Treat the
action as a one-dimensional problem with an equivalent mass of half the truck mass. Find the viscous
damping factor ␨ for the rear end and the viscous
damping coefﬁcient c for each shock absorber assuming its action to be vertical.

a

Problems

599

b

A

B
O
x
m2

m1

k

c
100 lb

3″

⎫ Equil.
⎬ position
⎭

Problem 8/42

8/43 Develop the equation of motion in terms of the variable x for the system shown. Determine an expression for the damping ratio ␨ in terms of the given
system properties. Neglect the mass of the crank AB
and assume small oscillations about the equilibrium
position shown.

Problem 8/40

8/41 Determine the damping ratio ␨ of the system depicted
in the ﬁgure. The mass and friction of the pulleys are
negligible, and the cable remains taut at all times.

O
A

a

x
b
m1
m2

m

c
θ

c

B
k

k
Problem 8/43
Problem 8/41

8/42 Derive the differential equation of motion for the
system shown in its equilibrium position. Neglect
the mass of link AB and assume small oscillations.

᭤ 8/44 Investigate the case of Coulomb damping for the
block shown, where the coefﬁcient of kinetic friction
is ␮k and each spring has a stiffness k/2. The block
is displaced a distance x0 from the neutral position
and released. Determine and solve the differential
equation of motion. Plot the resulting vibration and
indicate the rate r of decay of the amplitude with time.
y

x
k/2

k/2
m

μk
Problem 8/44

600

Chapter 8

Vibration and Time Response

8/3

Forced Vibration of Particles

Although there are many signiﬁcant applications of free vibrations,
the most important class of vibration problems is that where the motion
is continuously excited by a disturbing force. The force may be externally applied or may be generated within the system by such means as
unbalanced rotating parts. Forced vibrations may also be excited by the
motion of the system foundation.

Courtesy of MTS Systems Corporation

Harmonic Excitation
Various forms of forcing functions F ϭ F(t) and foundation displacements xB ϭ xB(t) are depicted in Fig. 8/8. The harmonic force shown in
part a of the ﬁgure occurs frequently in engineering practice, and the
understanding of the analysis associated with harmonic forces is a necessary ﬁrst step in the study of more complex forms. For this reason, we
will focus our attention on harmonic excitation.
We ﬁrst consider the system of Fig. 8/9a, where the body is subjected
to the external harmonic force F ϭ F0 sin ␻t, in which F0 is the force amplitude and ␻ is the driving frequency (in radians per second). Be sure to
distinguish between ␻n ϭ Ίk/m, which is a property of the system, and ␻,
which is a property of the force applied to the system. We also note that
for a force F ϭ F0 cos ␻t, one merely substitutes cos ␻t for sin ␻t in the results about to be developed.

F(t) or xB(t)
t
An automobile undergoing vibration
testing of its suspension system.

(a) Harmonic
F(t) or xB(t)
t
Square

Triangle

Saw tooth

F(t) or xB(t)
t
Half sine

General

(b) Periodic Nonharmonic
F(t) or xB(t)

t
Step

Ramp

Cycloidal Impulse
(c) Nonperiodic

Figure 8/8

Random

Article 8/3

Forced Vibration of Particles
F0 sin ω t

From the free-body diagram of Fig. 8/9a, we may apply Newton’s
second law to obtain
·
cx

Ϫkx Ϫ cx ϩ F0 sin ␻t ϭ mx
˙
¨

x
x
¨ ϩ 2␨␻n˙ ϩ ␻n2x ϭ

F0 sin ␻t
m

Ϫk(x Ϫ xB) Ϫ cx ϭ mx
˙
¨
x
x
¨ ϩ 2␨␻n˙ ϩ ␻n2x ϭ kb sin ␻t
m

(8/14)

We see immediately that Eq. 8/14 is exactly the same as our basic equation of motion, Eq. 8/13, in that F0 is replaced by kb. Consequently, all
the results about to be developed apply to either Eq. 8/13 or 8/14.

Undamped Forced Vibration
First, we treat the case where damping is negligible (c ϭ 0). Our
basic equation of motion, Eq. 8/13, becomes
x
¨ ϩ ␻n2x ϭ

F0
sin ␻t
m

(8/15)

The complete solution to Eq. 8/15 is the sum of the complementary
solution xc, which is the general solution of Eq. 8/15 with the right side
set to zero, and the particular solution xp, which is any solution to the
complete equation. Thus, x ϭ xc ϩ xp. We developed the complementary
solution in Art. 8/2. A particular solution is investigated by assuming

kx

F = F0 sin ω t

c

k
m
(a)

(8/13)

Base Excitation
In many cases, the excitation of the mass is due not to a directly applied force but to the movement of the base or foundation to which the
mass is connected by springs or other compliant mountings. Examples
of such applications are seismographs, vehicle suspensions, and structures shaken by earthquakes.
Harmonic movement of the base is equivalent to the direct application of a harmonic force. To show this, consider the system of Fig. 8/9b
where the spring is attached to the movable base. The free-body diagram shows the mass displaced a distance x from the neutral or equilibrium position it would have if the base were in its neutral position. The
base, in turn, is assumed to have a harmonic movement xB ϭ b sin ␻t.
Note that the spring deﬂection is the difference between the inertial displacements of the mass and the base. From the free-body diagram, Newton’s second law gives

or

m
x

In standard form, with the same variable substitutions made in Art. 8/2,
the equation of motion becomes

601

·
cx

m

k(x – xB)

x
B
k

c
m
Neutral
position
(b)

Figure 8/9

xB = b sin ω t

602

Chapter 8

Vibration and Time Response

that the form of the response to the force should resemble that of the
force term. To that end, we assume
xp ϭ X sin ␻t

(8/16)

where X is the amplitude (in units of length) of the particular solution.
Substituting this expression into Eq. 8/15 and solving for X yield
Xϭ

F0 /k
1 Ϫ (␻/␻n)2

(8/17)

Thus, the particular solution becomes
xp ϭ

F0 /k
1 Ϫ (␻/␻n)2

sin ␻t

(8/18)

The complementary solution, known as the transient solution, is of
no special interest here since, with time, it dies out with the small
amount of damping which is always unavoidably present. The particular
solution xp describes the continuing motion and is called the steady-state
solution. Its period is ␶ ϭ 2␲/␻, the same as that of the forcing function.
Of primary interest is the amplitude X of the motion. If we let ␦st
stand for the magnitude of the static deﬂection of the mass under a static load F0, then ␦st ϭ F0 /k, and we may form the ratio
Mϭ

X
1
ϭ
␦st 1 Ϫ (␻/␻n)2

(8/19)

The ratio M is called the amplitude ratio or magniﬁcation factor and is a
measure of the severity of the vibration. We especially note that M approaches inﬁnity as ␻ approaches ␻n. Consequently, if the system possesses no damping and is excited by a harmonic force whose frequency ␻
approaches the natural frequency ␻n of the system, then M, and thus X,
increase without limit. Physically, this means that the motion amplitude would reach the limits of the attached spring, which is a condition
to be avoided.
The value ␻n is called the resonant or critical frequency of the system, and the condition of ␻ being close in value to ␻n with the resulting
large displacement amplitude X is called resonance. For ␻ Ͻ ␻n, the
magniﬁcation factor M is positive, and the vibration is in phase with the
force F. For ␻ Ͼ ␻n, the magniﬁcation factor is negative, and the vibration is 180Њ out of phase with F. Figure 8/10 shows a plot of the absolute
value of M as a function of the driving-frequency ratio ␻/␻n.

6
5
4
|M| 3

Damped Forced Vibration
We now reintroduce damping in our expressions for forced vibration. Our basic differential equation of motion is

2
1
0
0

1

2

ω /ω n

Figure 8/10

3

x
x
¨ ϩ 2␨␻n˙ ϩ ␻n2x ϭ

F0 sin ␻t
m

[8/13]

Again, the complete solution is the sum of the complementary solution
xc, which is the general solution of Eq. 8/13 with the right side equal to

Article 8/3

zero, and the particular solution xp, which is any solution to the complete equation. We have already developed the complementary solution
xc in Art. 8/2. When damping is present, we ﬁnd that a single sine or cosine term, such as we were able to use for the undamped case, is not sufﬁciently general for the particular solution. So we try
xp ϭ X1 cos ␻t ϩ X2 sin ␻t

xp ϭ X sin (␻t Ϫ ␾)

or

Substitute the latter expression into Eq. 8/13, match coefﬁcients of sin ␻t
and cos ␻t, and solve the resulting two equations to obtain
Xϭ

F0 /k
{[1 Ϫ (␻/␻n)2]2 ϩ [2␨␻/␻n]2}1/2

␾ ϭ tanϪ1

΄1 Ϫ (␻/␻ ) ΅
2␨␻/␻n

n

2

(8/20)

(8/21)

The complete solution is now known, and for underdamped systems it
can be written as
x ϭ CeϪ␨␻nt sin (␻d t ϩ ␺) ϩ X sin (␻t Ϫ ␾)

(8/22)

Because the ﬁrst term on the right side diminishes with time, it is
known as the transient solution. The particular solution xp is the steadystate solution and is the part of the solution in which we are primarily
interested. All quantities on the right side of Eq. 8/22 are properties of
the system and the applied force, except for C and ␺ (which are determinable from initial conditions) and the running time variable t.

KEY CONCEPTS
Magniﬁcation Factor and Phase Angle
Near resonance the magnitude X of the steady-state solution is a
strong function of the damping ratio ␨ and the nondimensional frequency ratio ␻/␻n. It is again convenient to form the nondimensional ratio
M ϭ X/(F0 /k), which is called the amplitude ratio or magniﬁcation factor
Mϭ

{[1 Ϫ (␻/␻n

1
ϩ [2␨␻/␻n]2}1/2

) 2] 2

(8/23)

An accurate plot of the magniﬁcation factor M versus the frequency
ratio ␻/␻n for various values of the damping ratio ␨ is shown in Fig. 8/11.
This ﬁgure reveals the most essential information pertinent to the forced
vibration of a single-degree-of-freedom system under harmonic excitation.
It is clear from the graph that, if a motion amplitude is excessive, two possible remedies would be to (a) increase the damping (to obtain a larger value
of ␨) or (b) alter the driving frequency so that ␻ is farther from the resonant
frequency ␻n. The addition of damping is most effective near resonance.
Figure 8/11 also shows that, except for ␨ ϭ 0, the magniﬁcation-factor
curves do not actually peak at ␻/␻n ϭ 1. The peak for any given value of ␨
can be calculated by ﬁnding the maximum value of M from Eq. 8/23.

Forced Vibration of Particles

603

604

Chapter 8

Vibration and Time Response

6

␲

5

φ
rad

4

2

0
0

␲
—
2

0.1

M 3

1

ζ=0

ζ=0

0.2

0.1
0.2
0.5

ζ=1
ζ=1
0.5
0.2
0.1

0.5

ζ=0

ζ=1
1

2

0
0

3

1

ω /ω n

2

3

ω /ω n

Figure 8/12

Figure 8/11

The phase angle ␾, given by Eq. 8/21, can vary from 0 to ␲ and represents the part of a cycle (and thus the time) by which the response xp
lags the forcing function F. Figure 8/12 shows how the phase angle ␾
varies with the frequency ratio for various values of the damping ratio ␨.
Note that the value of ␾ when ␻/␻n ϭ 1 is 90Њ for all values of ␨. To further illustrate the phase difference between the response and the forcing function, we show in Fig. 8/13 two examples of the variation of F
and xp with ␻t. In the ﬁrst example, ␻ Ͻ ␻n and ␾ is taken to be ␲/4. In
the second example, ␻ Ͼ ␻n and ␾ is taken to be 3␲/4.

F, xp

F0

φ
ωt

φ
xp

X F
F

xp

␲

0

2␲

ωt

3␲

ω < ωn , φ = ␲ /4
F, xp

φ
xp

F0

F

F

ωt
φ

X

xp

␲

0

ω > ωn, φ = 3␲ /4

Figure 8/13

2␲

3␲

ωt

Article 8/3

Forced Vibration of Particles

Applications
Vibration-measuring instruments such as seismometers and accelerometers are frequently encountered applications of harmonic excitation. The elements of this class of instruments are shown in Fig.
8/14a. We note that the entire system is subjected to the motion xB of
the frame. Letting x denote the position of the mass relative to the
frame, we may apply Newton’s second law and obtain
Ϫcx Ϫ kx ϭ m
˙

d2
(x ϩ xB)
dt2

c
k
x
x
¨ ϩ m ˙ ϩ m x ϭ Ϫx B
¨

or

where (x ϩ xB) is the inertial displacement of the mass. If xB ϭ b sin ␻t,
then our equation of motion with the usual notation is
x
x
¨ ϩ 2␨␻n˙ ϩ ␻n2x ϭ b␻2 sin ␻t
which is the same as Eq. 8/13 if b␻2 is substituted for F0/m.
Again, we are interested only in the steady-state solution xp. Thus,
from Eq. 8/20, we have
b(␻/␻n)2

xp ϭ

{[1 Ϫ (␻/␻n)2]2 ϩ [2␨␻/␻n]2}1/2

sin (␻t Ϫ ␾)

If X represents the amplitude of the relative response xp, then the
nondimensional ratio X/b is
X/b ϭ (␻/␻n)2M
where M is the magniﬁcation ratio of Eq. 8/23. A plot of X/b as a function of the driving-frequency ratio ␻/␻n is shown in Fig. 8/14b. The similarities and differences between the magniﬁcation ratios of Figs. 8/14b
and 8/11 should be noted.

6

ζ=0

5
kx

4

k
X/b 3
m

0.1

m
x
c

·
cx

Equilibrium
position
xB = b sin ω t
Neutral
position

2

0.2

1
0
0

0.5
ζ=1
1

2

ω /ω n

(a)

(b)

Figure 8/14

3

605

606

Chapter 8

Vibration and Time Response

If the frequency ratio ␻/␻n is large, then X/b ഡ 1 for all values of the
damping ratio ␨. Under these conditions, the displacement of the mass
relative to the frame is approximately the same as the absolute displacement of the frame, and the instrument acts as a displacement meter. To
obtain a high value of ␻/␻n, we need a small value of ␻n ϭ Ίk/m, which
means a soft spring and a large mass. With such a combination, the
mass will tend to stay inertially ﬁxed. Displacement meters generally
have very light damping.
On the other hand, if the frequency ratio ␻/␻n is small, then M approaches unity (see Fig. 8/11) and X/b ഡ (␻/␻n)2 or X ഡ b(␻/␻n)2. But b␻2
is the maximum acceleration of the frame. Thus, X is proportional to the
maximum acceleration of the frame, and the instrument may be used as
an accelerometer. The damping ratio is generally selected so that M approximates unity over the widest possible range of ␻/␻n. From Fig. 8/11,
we see that a damping factor somewhere between ␨ ϭ 0.5 and ␨ ϭ 1
would meet this criterion.

C
L

R

Electric Circuit Analogy
An important analogy exists between electric circuits and mechanical spring-mass systems. Figure 8/15 shows a series circuit consisting of
a voltage E which is a function of time, an inductance L, a capacitance
C, and a resistance R. If we denote the charge by the symbol q, the equation which governs the charge is
Lq ϩ Rq ϩ
¨
˙

1
qϭE
C

(8/24)

E

Figure 8/15

This equation has the same form as the equation for the mechanical system. Thus, by a simple interchange of symbols, the behavior of the electrical circuit may be used to predict the behavior of the mechanical
system, or vice versa. The mechanical and electrical equivalents in the
following table are worth noting:

MECHANICAL-ELECTRICAL EQUIVALENTS

Article 8/3

Forced Vibration of Particles

607

SAMPLE PROBLEM 8/4
A 50-kg instrument is supported by four springs, each of stiffness 7500 N/m.
If the instrument foundation undergoes harmonic motion given in meters by
xB ϭ 0.002 cos 50t, determine the amplitude of the steady-state motion of the instrument. Damping is negligible.

Solution. For harmonic oscillation of the base, we substitute kb for F0 in our particular-solution results, so that, from Eq. 8/17, the steady-state amplitude becomes

ᕡ

Xϭ

b
1 Ϫ (␻/␻n)2

Helpful Hints

The resonant frequency is ␻n ϭ Ίk/m ϭ Ί4(7500)/50 ϭ 24.5 rad/s, and the impressed frequency ␻ ϭ 50 rad/s is given. Thus,

ᕢ

Xϭ

0.002
ϭ Ϫ6.32(10Ϫ4) m
1 Ϫ (50/24.5)2

or

Ϫ0.632 mm

Ans.

Note that the frequency ratio ␻/␻n is approximately 2, so that the condition of
resonance is avoided.

SAMPLE PROBLEM 8/5
The spring attachment point B is given a horizontal motion xB ϭ b cos ␻t.
Determine the critical driving frequency ␻c for which the oscillations of the mass
m tend to become excessively large. Neglect the friction and mass associated
with the pulleys. The two springs have the same stiffness k.

ᕡ Note that either sin 50 t or cos 50 t
can be used for the forcing function
with this same result.

ᕢ The minus sign indicates that the
motion is 180Њ out of phase with the
applied excitation.

Neutral position
xB = b cos ω t
k
B
T T
Equilibrium
position

Solution.

The free-body diagram is drawn for arbitrary positive displacements
x and xB. The motion variable x is measured downward from the position of static equilibrium deﬁned as that which exists when xB ϭ 0. The additional stretch
ᕡ in the upper spring, beyond that which exists at static equilibrium, is 2x Ϫ xB.
Therefore, the dynamic spring force in the upper spring, and hence the dynamic
ᕢ tension T in the cable, is k(2x Ϫ xB). Summing forces in the x-direction gives
[ΣFx ϭ mx ]
¨

Ϫ2k(2x Ϫ xB) Ϫ kx ϭ mx
¨

k

Helpful Hints

2kb cos ␻t
5k
xϭ
m
m

ᕡ If a review of the kinematics of constrained motion is necessary, see
Art. 2/9.

The natural frequency of the system is ␻n ϭ Ί5k/m. Thus,
␻cϭ ␻n ϭ Ί5k/m

m

kx
(Dynamic forces only)

which becomes
x
¨ϩ

x

Ans.

ᕢ We learned from the discussion in
Art. 8/2 that the equal and opposite
forces associated with the position of
static equilibrium may be omitted
from the analysis. Our use of the
terms dynamic spring force and dynamic tension stresses that only the
force increments in addition to the
static values need be considered.

608

Chapter 8

Vibration and Time Response

SAMPLE PROBLEM 8/6

p = p0 sin ω t

The 100-lb piston is supported by a spring of modulus k ϭ 200 lb/in. A dashpot of damping coefﬁcient c ϭ 85 lb-sec/ft acts in parallel with the spring. A ﬂuctuating pressure p ϭ 0.625 sin 30t in lb/in.2 acts on the piston, whose top surface
area is 80 in.2 Determine the steady-state displacement as a function of time and
the maximum force transmitted to the base.

Solution.

W

k

We begin by computing the system natural frequency and damping

c

ratio:
Equilibrium
position

F = pA sin ω t

␨ϭ

c
ϭ
2m␻n

x

85
2

100
΂32.2΃(27.8)

ϭ 0.492 (underdamped)

The steady-state amplitude, from Eq. 8/20, is
Xϭ

ϭ

ᕡ

F0 /k
{[1 Ϫ (␻/␻n

) 2] 2

ϩ [2␨␻/␻n]2}1/2

·
kx
cx
(Dynamic forces only)

(0.625)(80)/[(200)(12)]
{[1 Ϫ (30/27.8)2]2 ϩ [2(0.492)(30/27.8)]2}1/2

Helpful Hints

ϭ 0.01938 ft

ᕡ You are encouraged to repeat these
calculations with the damping coefﬁcient c set to zero so as to observe
the inﬂuence of the relatively large
amount of damping present.

The phase angle, from Eq. 8/21, is

ᕢ

␾ ϭ tanϪ1

΄1 Ϫ (␻/␻ ) ΅
΄2(0.492)(30/27.8)΅
1 Ϫ (30/27.8)
2␨␻/␻n

n

ϭ tanϪ1

2

ᕢ Note that the argument of the in-

2

ϭ 1.724 rad
The steady-state motion is then given by the second term on the right side of
Eq. 8/22:
xp ϭ X sin (␻t Ϫ ␾) ϭ 0.01938 sin (30t Ϫ 1.724) ft

Ans.

The force Ftr transmitted to the base is the sum of the spring and damper
forces, or
Ftr ϭ kxp ϩ cx p ϭ kX sin (␻t Ϫ ␾) ϩ c␻X cos (␻t Ϫ ␾)
˙
The maximum value of Ftr is
(Ftr)max ϭ Ί(kX)2 ϩ (c␻X)2 ϭ XΊk2 ϩ c2␻2
ϭ 0.01938Ί[(200)(12)]2 ϩ (85)2(30)2

ᕡ

ϭ 67.9 lb

Ans.

verse tangent expression for ␾ has a
positive numerator and a negative
denominator for the case at hand,
thus placing ␾ in the second quadrant. Recall that the deﬁned range
of ␾ is 0 Յ ␾ Յ ␲.

Article 8/3

PROBLEMS
(Unless otherwise instructed, assume that the damping is
light to moderate so that the amplitude of the forced response is a maximum at ␻/␻n ഡ 1.)

Introductory Problems

Problems

609

8/50 The block of weight W ϭ 100 lb is suspended by two
springs each of stiffness k ϭ 200 lb/ft and is acted
upon by the force F ϭ 75 cos 15t lb where t is the
time in seconds. Determine the amplitude X of the
steady-state motion if the viscous damping coefﬁcient c is (a) 0 and (b) 60 lb-sec/ft. Compare these
amplitudes to the static spring deﬂection ␦st.

8/45 Determine the amplitude X of the steady-state motion
of the 10-kg mass if (a) c ϭ 500 N ⅐ s/m and (b) c ϭ 0.
k

k = 100 kN/m

k

c

c
W
m = 10 kg
F
Problem 8/50

F = 1000 cos 120t N
Problem 8/45

8/46 A viscously damped spring-mass system is excited by
a harmonic force of constant amplitude F0 but varying frequency ␻. If the amplitude of the steady-state
motion is observed to decrease by a factor of 8 as the
frequency ratio ␻/␻n is varied from 1 to 2, determine
the damping ratio ␨ of the system.

8/51 An external force F ϭ F0 sin ␻t is applied to the
cylinder as shown. What value ␻c of the driving frequency would cause excessively large oscillations of
the system?
k
2m

8/47 The 64.4-lb cart is acted upon by the harmonic force
shown in the ﬁgure. If c ϭ 0, determine the range of
the driving frequency ␻ for which the magnitude of
the steady-state response is less than 3 in.

m

k = 6 lb/in.
c

64.4 lb

F

F = 5 cos ω t lb
Problem 8/51

Problem 8/47

8/48 If the viscous damping coefﬁcient of the damper in
the system of Prob. 8/47 is c ϭ 2.4 lb-sec/ft, determine the range of the driving frequency ␻ for which
the magnitude of the steady-state response is less
than 3 in.
8/49 If the driving frequency for the system of Prob. 8/47
is ␻ ϭ 6 rad/sec, determine the required value of the
damping coefﬁcient c if the steady-state amplitude is
not to exceed 3 in.

8/52 A viscously damped spring-mass system is forced
harmonically at the undamped natural frequency
(␻/␻n ϭ 1). If the damping ratio ␨ is doubled from 0.1
to 0.2, compute the percentage reduction R1 in the
steady-state amplitude. Compare with the result R2
of a similar calculation for the condition ␻/␻n ϭ 2.
Verify your results by inspecting Fig. 8/11.

610

Chapter 8

Vibration and Time Response

Representative Problems
8/53 A linear spring-mass oscillator has a viscous damping factor ␨ ϭ 0.2 and an undamped natural frequency ƒn ϭ 6 Hz. By referring to Fig. 8/11, estimate
the range of frequencies ƒ of the periodic applied
force for which the amplitude of the oscillator will
not exceed twice the static deﬂection which would be
caused by applying a static force equal in magnitude
to that of the periodic force. Check your estimate by
applying Eq. 8/23.
8/54 It was noted in the text that the maxima of the
curves for the magniﬁcation factor M are not located
at ␻/␻n ϭ 1. Determine an expression in terms of the
damping ratio ␨ for the frequency ratio at which the
maxima occur.
8/55 Each 0.5-kg ball is attached to the end of the light
elastic rod and deﬂects 4 mm when a 2-N force is
statically applied to the ball. If the central collar is
given a vertical harmonic movement with a frequency of 4 Hz and an amplitude of 3 mm, ﬁnd the
amplitude y0 of vertical vibration of each ball.

0.5 kg

8/57 The 20-kg variable-speed motorized unit is restrained in the horizontal direction by two springs,
each of which has a stiffness of 2.1 kN/m. Each of
the two dashpots has a viscous damping coefﬁcient
c ϭ 58 N ⅐ s/m. In what ranges of speeds N can the
motor be run for which the magniﬁcation factor M
will not exceed 2?

k

k
N

c

c

Problem 8/57

8/58 When the person stands in the center of the ﬂoor
system shown, he causes a static deﬂection ␦st of the
ﬂoor under his feet. If he walks (or runs quickly!) in
the same area, how many steps per second would
cause the ﬂoor to vibrate with the greatest vertical
amplitude?

0.5 kg

Problem 8/55

8/56 The motion of the outer frame B is given by xB ϭ
b sin ␻t. For what range of the driving frequency ␻ is
the amplitude of the motion of the mass m relative
to the frame less than 2b?
xB = b sin ω t
k/2

k/2
m
B

Problem 8/56

Problem 8/58

Article 8/3
8/59 The instrument shown has a mass of 43 kg and is
spring-mounted to the horizontal base. If the amplitude of vertical vibration of the base is 0.10 mm, calculate the range of frequencies ƒn of the base
vibration which must be prohibited if the amplitude
of vertical vibration of the instrument is not to exceed 0.15 mm. Each of the four identical springs has
a stiffness of 7.2 kN/m.

Problems

611

8/62 Derive an expression for the transmission ratio T for
the system of the ﬁgure. This ratio is deﬁned as the
maximum force transmitted to the base divided by
the amplitude F0 of the forcing function. Express
your answer in terms of ␨, ␻, ␻n, and the magniﬁcation factor M.
F = F0 sin ω t

m
xB
c

k

Base
Problem 8/59

Problem 8/62

8/60 Attachment B is given a horizontal motion xB ϭ
b cos ␻t. Derive the equation of motion for the mass
m and state the critical frequency ␻c for which the
oscillations of the mass become excessively large.

8/63 A device to produce vibrations consists of the two
counter-rotating wheels, each carrying an eccentric
mass m0 ϭ 1 kg with a center of mass at a distance
e ϭ 12 mm from its axis of rotation. The wheels are
synchronized so that the vertical positions of the unbalanced masses are always identical. The total mass
of the device is 10 kg. Determine the two possible
values of the equivalent spring constant k for the
mounting which will permit the amplitude of the periodic force transmitted to the ﬁxed mounting to be
1500 N due to the imbalance of the rotors at a speed
of 1800 rev/min. Neglect damping.

xB = b cos ω t

x
c

m
k2

k1

B

Problem 8/60

8/61 Attachment B is given a horizontal motion xB ϭ
b cos ␻t. Derive the equation of motion for the mass
m and state the critical frequency ␻c for which the
oscillations of the mass become excessively large.
What is the damping ratio ␨ for the system?

c1

ω

ω

m0
e

θ

θ

xB = b cos ω t

x

Problem 8/63

c2

m
B

k
Problem 8/61

m0
e

612

Chapter 8

Vibration and Time Response

8/64 The seismic instrument shown is attached to a structure which has a horizontal harmonic vibration at
3 Hz. The instrument has a mass m ϭ 0.5 kg, a spring
stiffness k ϭ 20 N/m, and a viscous damping coefﬁcient c ϭ 3 N ⅐ s/m. If the maximum recorded value of
x in its steady-state motion is X ϭ 2 mm, determine
the amplitude b of the horizontal movement xB of
the structure.

k2

C
k1
x
b

m

xB = b0 cos ω t
O

xB

x

A

a

c

m
c

k
Structure
Problem 8/64

Problem 8/67

8/65 A device similar to that shown in Prob. 8/64 is to be
used to measure the horizontal acceleration of the
structure which is vibrating with a frequency of 5 Hz.
The mass is m ϭ 0.008 kg, the spring constant is
k ϭ 150 N/m, and the damping factor is ␨ ϭ 0.75. If
the amplitude of x is 4.0 mm, approximate the maximum acceleration amax of the structure.

8/68 The seismic instrument is mounted on a structure
which has a vertical vibration with a frequency of
5 Hz and a double amplitude of 18 mm. The sensing
element has a mass m ϭ 2 kg, and the spring stiffness is k ϭ 1.5 kN/m. The motion of the mass relative to the instrument base is recorded on a revolving
drum and shows a double amplitude of 24 mm during
the steady-state condition. Calculate the viscous
damping constant c.

8/66 Derive and solve the equation of motion for the mass
which is subjected to the suddenly applied force F
that remains constant after application. The displacement and velocity of the mass are both zero at
time t ϭ 0. Plot x versus t for several motion cycles.

2 kg

Force F
k
m

F

F0

0

k=
1.5 kN/m

c
Structure
0

Time, t

Problem 8/66

8/67 Derive and solve the equation of motion for the mass
m in terms of the variable x for the system shown.
Neglect the mass of the lever AOC and assume small
oscillations.

Problem 8/68

D
24 mm

Article 8/3
᭤ 8/69 Determine the amplitude of vertical vibration of the
spring-mounted trailer as it travels at a velocity of
25 km/h over the corduroy road whose contour may
be expressed by a sine or cosine term. The mass of
the trailer is 500 kg and that of the wheels alone
may be neglected. During the loading, each 75 kg
added to the load caused the trailer to sag 3 mm on
its springs. Assume that the wheels are in contact
with the road at all times and neglect damping. At
what critical speed vc is the vibration of the trailer
greatest?

50 mm

1.2 m
Problem 8/69

Problems

613

᭤ 8/70 Derive the expression for the power loss P averaged
over a complete steady-state cycle due to the frictional dissipation of energy in a viscously damped
linear oscillator. The forcing function is F0 sin ␻t,
and the displacement-time relation for steady-state
motion is xP ϭ X sin (␻t Ϫ ␾) where the amplitude X
is given by Eq. 8/20. (Hint: The frictional energy loss
during a displacement dx is cx dx, where c is the vis˙
cous damping coefﬁcient. Integrate this expression
over a complete cycle and divide by the period of the
cycle.)

614

Chapter 8

Vibration and Time Response

8/4

F0 cos ω t
l
—
3

l
—
3

O

l
—
3
m

k

c

Vibration of Rigid Bodies

The subject of planar rigid-body vibrations is entirely analogous to
that of particle vibrations. In particle vibrations, the variable of interest is
one of translation (x), while in rigid-body vibrations, the variable of primary concern may be one of rotation (␪). Thus, the principles of rotational
dynamics play a central role in the development of the equation of motion.
We will see that the equation of motion for rotational vibration of
rigid bodies has a mathematical form identical to that developed in Arts.
8/2 and 8/3 for translational vibration of particles. As was the case with
particles, it is convenient to draw the free-body diagram for an arbitrary
positive value of the displacement variable, because a negative displacement value easily leads to sign errors in the equation of motion. The
practice of measuring the displacement from the position of static equilibrium rather than from the position of zero spring deﬂection continues
to simplify the formulation for linear systems because the equal and opposite forces and moments associated with the static equilibrium position cancel from the analysis.
Rather than individually treating the cases of (a) free vibration, undamped and damped, and (b) forced vibrations, undamped and damped,
as was done with particles in Arts. 8/2 and 8/3, we will go directly to the
damped, forced problem.

Rotational Vibration of a Bar
As an illustrative example, consider the rotational vibration of the
uniform slender bar of Fig. 8/16a. Figure 8/16b depicts the free-body diagram associated with the horizontal position of static equilibrium.
Equating to zero the moment sum about O yields

(a)

΂2l ϩ 6l ΃ ϩ mg΂6l ΃ ϭ 0

ϪP
O′
y
l
—
2

l
–
6

O′ = 0
x
O

mg

P

(b)

mg
4

where P is the magnitude of the static spring force.
Figure 8/16c depicts the free-body diagram associated with an arbitrary positive angular displacement ␪. Using the equation of rotational
¨
motion ΣMO ϭ IO ␪ as developed in Chapter 6, we write

˙
΂6l cos ␪΃ Ϫ ΂cl ␪ cos ␪΃΂3l cos ␪΃ Ϫ ΂P ϩ k 2l sin ␪΃΂2l cos ␪΃
3
3
3
l
1
¨
ϩ (F cos ␻t)΂ cos ␪΃ ϭ ml ␪
9
3

(mg)
F0 cos ω t

θ

Ox
mg

d l
cl ·
c — — sin θ = — θ cos θ
2l
3
P + k — sin θ dt 3
3
(c)

)

Figure 8/16

2

0

Oy

(

Pϭ

where IO ϭ I ϩ md2 ϭ ml2/12 ϩ m(l/6)2 ϭ ml2/9 is obtained from the
parallel-axis theorem for mass moments of inertia.
For small angular deﬂections, the approximations sin ␪ ഡ ␪ and
cos ␪ ഡ 1 may be used. With P ϭ mg/4, the equation of motion, upon rearrangement and simpliﬁcation, becomes

¨
␪ϩ

(F0 l/3) cos ␻t
c ˙
k
␪ ϩ4 ␪ϭ
m
m
ml2/9

(8/25)

Article 8/4

The right side has been left unsimplified in the form M0(cos ␻t)/IO,
where M0 ϭ F0l/3 is the magnitude of the moment about point O of the
externally applied force. Note that the two equal and opposite moments associated with static equilibrium forces canceled on the left
side of the equation of motion. Thus, it is not necessary to include the
static-equilibrium forces and moments in the analysis.

Rotational Counterparts of Translational Vibration
At this point, we observe that Eq. 8/25 is identical in form to Eq.
8/13 for the translational case, so we may write

¨
˙
␪ ϩ 2␨␻n ␪ ϩ ␻n2␪ ϭ

M0 cos ␻t
IO

(8/26)

Thus, we may use all of the relations developed in Arts. 8/2 and 8/3
merely by replacing the translational quantities with their rotational
counterparts. The following table shows the results of this procedure as
applied to the rotating bar of Fig. 8/16:

In the preceding table, the variable k␪ in the expression for ⌰ represents
the equivalent torsional spring constant of the system of Fig. 8/16 and is
determined by writing the restoring moment of the spring. For a small
angle ␪, this moment about O is
4

Mk ϭ Ϫ[k(2l/3) sin ␪][(2l/3) cos ␪] ഡ Ϫ(9kl2)␪
4
Thus, k␪ ϭ 9 kl2. Note that M0/k␪ is the static angular deﬂection which
would be produced by a constant external moment M0.
We conclude that an exact analogy exists between particle vibration and the small angular vibration of rigid bodies. Furthermore, the
utilization of this analogy can save the labor of complete rederivation of
the governing relationships for a given problem of general rigid-body
vibration.

Vibration of Rigid Bodies

615

616

Chapter 8

Vibration and Time Response

SAMPLE PROBLEM 8/7

Oy

A simpliﬁed version of a pendulum used in impact tests is shown in the ﬁgure.
Derive the equation of motion and determine the period for small oscillations
about the pivot. The mass center G is located a distance r ϭ 0.9 m from O, and the
radius of gyration about O is kO ϭ 0.95 m. The friction of the bearing is negligible.

Ox

O
–
r

Solution. We draw the free-body diagram for an arbitrary, positive value of the
angular-displacement variable ␪, which is measured counterclockwise for the coordinate system chosen. Next we apply the governing equation of motion to obtain

¨
ᕡ [ΣMO ϭ IO ␪ ]

θ

–
r

θ

G

¨
Ϫmgr sin ␪ ϭ mkO ␪
2

¨
␪ϩ

or

gr
kO2

sin ␪ ϭ 0

Ans.
mg

Note that the governing equation is independent of the mass. When ␪ is small,
sin ␪ ഡ ␪, and our equation of motion may be written as

¨
␪ϩ

gr
kO2

Helpful Hints

ᕡ With our choice of point O as the

␪ϭ0

moment center, the bearing reactions Ox and Oy never enter the
equation of motion.

ᕢ The frequency in cycles per second and the period in seconds are
Ans.

For the given properties:

Ans.

ᕢ For large angles of oscillation, determining the period for the pendulum
requires the evaluation of an elliptic
integral.

SAMPLE PROBLEM 8/8

l
—
2

The uniform bar of mass m and length l is pivoted at its center. The spring
of constant k at the left end is attached to a stationary surface, but the right-end
spring, also of constant k, is attached to a support which undergoes a harmonic
motion given by yB ϭ b sin ␻t. Determine the driving frequency ␻c which causes
resonance.

l
—
2

O

m
k

k

B

yB = b sin ω t

Helpful Hints

Solution.

We use the moment equation of motion about the ﬁxed point O to

obtain

ᕡ

΂

΃

΂

΃

l
l
l
l
1
¨
ml2 ␪
Ϫ k sin ␪
cos ␪ Ϫ k sin ␪ Ϫ yB
cos ␪ ϭ
2
2
2
2
12

ᕡ As previously, we consider only the
changes in the forces due to a movement away from the equilibrium
position.
Oy

Assuming small deﬂections and simplifying give us

¨
␪ϩ

6kb
6k
␪ϭ
sin ␻t
ml
m

ᕢ The natural frequency should be recognized from the now-familiar form of the

θ

Ox

(

l
k — sin θ
2

)

mg

(

)

l
k — sin θ – yB
2

equation to be
␻n ϭ Ί6k/m
Thus, ␻c ϭ ␻n ϭ Ί6k/m will result in resonance (as well as violation of our smallangle assumption!).
Ans.

¨
ᕢ The standard form here is ␪ ϩ ␻n2␪ ϭ

M0 sin ␻t
klb
and IO ϭ
, where M0 ϭ
2
IO
1
2. The natural frequency ␻ of a
n
12 ml
system does not depend on the external disturbance.

Article 8/4

Vibration of Rigid Bodies

617

SAMPLE PROBLEM 8/9
Derive the equation of motion for the homogeneous circular cylinder, which
rolls without slipping. If the cylinder mass is 50 kg, the cylinder radius 0.5 m,
the spring constant 75 N/m, and the damping coefﬁcient 10 N ⅐ s/m, determine

x
m
k

r

c

(a) the undamped natural frequency
(b) the damping ratio
(c) the damped natural frequency
(d) the period of the damped system.
In addition, determine x as a function of time if the cylinder is released from rest
at the position x ϭ Ϫ0.2 m when t ϭ 0.

Solution.

We have a choice of motion variables in that either x or the angular
ᕡ displacement ␪ of the cylinder may be used. Since the problem statement involves x, we draw the free-body diagram for an arbitrary, positive value of x and
write the two motion equations for the cylinder as

ᕢ [ΣFx ϭ mx ]
¨

Ϫcx Ϫ kx ϩ F ϭ mx
˙
¨

¨
The condition of rolling with no slip is ¨ ϭ r ␪ . Substitution of this condition
x
into the moment equation gives F ϭ Ϫ1 mx . Inserting this expression for the
¨
2
friction force into the force equation for the x-direction yields
Ϫcx Ϫ kx Ϫ
˙

1
mx ϭ mx
¨
¨
2

or

ᕡ The angle ␪ is taken positive clockwise to be kinematically consistent
with x.

ᕢ The friction force F may be as-

¨
ϪFr ϭ 1 mr2 ␪
2

¨
[ΣMG ϭ I ␪ ]

Helpful Hints

c
k
x
˙ϩ2 xϭ0
3m
3m

x
¨ϩ2

sumed in either direction. We will
find that the actual direction is to
the right for x Ͼ 0 and to the left
for x Ͻ 0; F ϭ 0 when x ϭ 0.

Equilibrium
position

Comparing the above equation with that for the standard damped oscillator,
Eq. 8/9, allows us to state directly
␻n

(a)

2

+θ
mg

kx

2 k
ϭ
3m

x

O

Ans.
F

2 c
2␨␻n ϭ
3m

(b)

10
1 c
ϭ
␨ϭ
ϭ 0.0667
3 m␻n 3(50)(1)

Ans.
N

Hence, the damped natural frequency and the damped period are

(c)

␻d ϭ ␻nΊ1 Ϫ ␨2 ϭ (1)Ί1 Ϫ (0.0667)2 ϭ 0.998 rad/s

Ans.

(d)

␶d ϭ 2␲/␻d ϭ 2␲/0.998 ϭ 6.30 s

Ans.

From Eq. 8/12, the underdamped solution to the equation of motion is
x ϭ CeϪ␨␻nt sin (␻dt ϩ ␺) ϭ CeϪ(0.0667)(1)t sin (0.998t ϩ ␺)
The velocity is

x
˙ ϭ Ϫ0.0667CeϪ0.0667t sin (0.998t ϩ ␺)
ϩ 0.998CeϪ0.0667t cos (0.998t ϩ ␺)

At time t ϭ 0, x and ˙ become
x
x0 ϭ C sin ␺ ϭ Ϫ0.2
x
˙0 ϭ Ϫ0.0667C sin ␺ ϩ 0.998C cos ␺ ϭ 0
The solution to the two equations in C and ␺ gives
C ϭ Ϫ0.200 m

␺ ϭ 1.504 rad

Thus, the motion is given by
x ϭ Ϫ0.200eϪ0.0667t sin (0.998t ϩ 1.504) m

Ans.

·
cx

618

Chapter 8

Vibration and Time Response

PROBLEMS
O

Introductory Problems
8/71 The light rod and attached sphere of mass m are at
rest in the horizontal position shown. Determine the
period ␶ for small oscillations in the vertical plane
about the pivot O.

a

k
O

m
b
k
Problem 8/73

b

b

8/74 Determine the natural frequency ƒn for small oscillations in the vertical plane about the bearing O for
the semicircular disk of radius r.

b

Problem 8/71

8/72 Derive the differential equation for small oscillations
of the spring-loaded pendulum and ﬁnd the period ␶.
The equilibrium position is vertical as shown. The
mass of the rod is negligible.

O
r

Problem 8/74
O
b
k

k
l

8/75 The thin square plate is suspended from a socket
(not shown) which ﬁts the small ball attachment at
O. If the plate is made to swing about axis A-A, determine the period for small oscillations. Neglect the
small offset, mass, and friction of the ball.
B

A

b/2

m
B
Problem 8/72

O

b/2
A

b

8/73 A uniform rectangular plate pivots about a horizontal axis through one of its corners as shown. Determine the natural frequency ␻n of small oscillations.

b

b
Problem 8/75

Article 8/4

8/76 If the square plate of Prob. 8/75 is made to oscillate
about axis B-B, determine the period of small oscillations.
8/77 The rectangular frame is formed of a uniform slender rod and is suspended from a socket (not shown)
which ﬁts the small ball attachment at O. If the rectangle is made to swing about axis A-A, determine
the natural frequency for small oscillations. Neglect
the small offset, mass, and friction of the ball.

Problems

619

Representative Problems
8/80 The circular ring of radius r is suspended from a
socket (not shown) which ﬁts the small ball attachment at O. Determine the ratio R of the period of
small oscillations about axis B-B to that about axis
A-A. Neglect the small offset, mass, and friction of
the ball.
B
A

B

A

O

b
b

b

O

B

A
B
A
b

r

2b
Problem 8/77
Problem 8/80

8/78 If the rectangular frame of Prob. 8/77 is made to
oscillate about axis B-B, determine the natural frequency of small oscillations and compare it with the
answer for Prob. 8/77.

8/81 A spring-loaded homogeneous plate of mass m pivots
freely about a vertical axis through point O. Determine the natural frequency ƒn of small oscillations
about the equilibrium position shown.

8/79 The ﬂywheel is suspended from its center by a wire
from a ﬁxed support, and a period ␶1 is measured for
torsional oscillation of the ﬂywheel about the vertical axis. Two small weights, each of mass m, are next
attached to the ﬂywheel in opposite positions at a
distance r from the center. This additional mass results in a slightly longer period ␶2. Write an expression for the moment of inertia I of the ﬂywheel in
terms of the measured quantities.

k
l/3 O

2l/3

l

k
r

r
Problem 8/81

Problem 8/79

620

Chapter 8

Vibration and Time Response

8/82 The mass of the uniform slender rod is 3 kg. Determine the position x for the 1.2-kg slider such that
the system period is 1 s. Assume small oscillations
about the horizontal equilibrium position shown.

250 N/m

8/85 When the motor is slowly brought up to speed, a
rather large vibratory oscillation of the entire motor
about O-O occurs at a speed of 360 rev/min, which
shows that this speed corresponds to the natural frequency of free oscillation of the motor. If the motor
has a mass of 43 kg and radius of gyration of 100 mm
about O-O, determine the stiffness k of each of the
four identical spring mounts.

1.2 kg
O

O

3 kg

0.4 m
x
0.8 m
200 mm

Problem 8/82

8/83 Determine the expression for the natural frequency
ƒn of small oscillations of the weighted arm about O.
The stiffness of the spring is k, and its length is adjusted so that the arm is in equilibrium in the horizontal position shown. Neglect the mass of the spring
and arm compared with m.
l
O
m

b
k

200 mm O

Problem 8/85

8/86 The center of mass G of the ship may be assumed to
be at the center of the equivalent 50-ft square section. The metacentric height h, determined by the
intersection M of the ship’s centerline with the line
of action of the total buoyancy force acting through
the center of buoyancy B, is 3 ft. Determine the period ␶ of one complete roll of the ship if the amplitude is small and the resistance of the water is
neglected. Neglect also the change in cross section of
the ship at the bow and stern, and treat the loaded
ship as a uniform solid block of square cross section.
50′

Problem 8/83

8/84 The uniform rod of mass m is freely pivoted about
point O. Assume small oscillations and determine an
expression for the damping ratio ␨. For what value
ccr of the damping coefﬁcient c will the system be
critically damped?

M

h
G
B

b

W

a

W

O
c

Problem 8/84

k

Problem 8/86

50′

Article 8/4
8/87 The system of Prob. 8/42 is repeated here. If the link
AB now has mass m3 and radius of gyration kO about
point O, determine the equation of motion in terms
of the variable x. Assume small oscillations. The
damping coefﬁcient for the dashpot is c.

a

b

A

B

Problems

621

8/89 The circular sector of mass m is cut from steel plate
of uniform thickness and mounted in a bearing at its
center O so that it can swing freely in the vertical
plane. If the sector is released from rest with ␪ ϭ 0,
derive its differential equation of motion assuming
negligible damping Determine the period ␶ for small
␲
oscillations about the position ␪ ϭ .
2

m3

O

x
O
m2

β

r

m1

θ

β

G

k

c

Problem 8/89

Problem 8/87

8/88 Determine the period ␶ of small oscillations of the
semicylinder of mass m and radius r as it rolls without
slipping on the horizontal surface.

8/90 Two identical uniform bars are welded together at a
right angle and are pivoted about a horizontal axis
through point O as shown. Determine the critical
driving frequency ␻c of the block B which will result
in excessively large oscillations of the assembly. The
mass of the welded assembly is m.
l/2

O

O

–
r
r

l/2

k

θ
G

k
l
B
xB = b sin ω t

Problem 8/88
Problem 8/90

622

Chapter 8

Vibration and Time Response

8/91 The uniform solid cylinder of mass m and radius r
rolls without slipping during its oscillation on the
circular surface of radius R. If the motion is conﬁned
to small amplitudes ␪ ϭ ␪0, determine the period ␶ of
the oscillations. Also determine the angular velocity
␻ of the cylinder as it crosses the vertical centerline.
˙
(Caution: Do not confuse ␻ with ␪ or with ␻n as
used in the deﬁning equations. Note also that ␪ is
not the angular displacement of the cylinder.)

8/93 The cart B is given the harmonic displacement
xB ϭ b sin ␻t. Determine the steady-state amplitude
⌰ of the periodic oscillation of the uniform slender
bar which is pinned to the cart at P. Assume small
angles and neglect friction at the pivot. The torsional
spring is undeformed when ␪ ϭ 0.
θ

m

O
l

xB = b sin ω t

R

K

P

θ

B
r
Problem 8/93

G

Problem 8/91

8/92 The homogeneous solid cylindrical pulley has mass
m1 and radius r. If the attachment at B undergoes
the indicated harmonic displacement, determine
the equation of motion of the system in terms of the
variable x. The cord which connects mass m2 to the
upper spring does not slip on the pulley.
xB = b cos ω t

8/94 The circular disk of mass m and moment of inertia I
about its central axis is welded to the steel shaft
which, in turn, is welded to the ﬁxed block. The disk
is given an angular displacement ␪0 and then released, causing a torsional vibration of the disk with
␪ changing between ϩ␪0 and Ϫ␪0. The shaft resists
the twist with a moment M ϭ JG␪/L, where J is the
polar moment of inertia of the cross section of the
shaft about the rotation axis, G is the shear modulus
of elasticity of the shaft (resistance to shear stress),
␪ is the angle of twist in radians, and L is the length
of the twisted shaft. Derive the expression for the
natural frequency ƒn of the torsional vibration.

L
m1

O r

k1

B

m2
x
k2

Problem 8/92

θ

Problem 8/94

Article 8/4

8/95 The segmented “dummy” of Prob. 6/103 is repeated
here. The hip joint O is assumed to remain ﬁxed to
the car, and the torso above the hip is treated as a
rigid body of mass m. The center of mass of the torso
is at G and the radius of gyration of the torso about
O is kO. Assume that muscular response acts as an
internal torsional spring which exerts a moment
M ϭ K␪ on the upper torso, where K is the torsional
spring constant and ␪ is the angular deﬂection from
the initial vertical position. If the car is brought to a
sudden stop with a constant deceleration a, derive
the differential equation for the motion of the torso
prior to its impact with the dashboard.
θ

G
r

O

Problems

623

᭤8/96 The elements of the “swing-axle” type of independent rear suspension for automobiles are depicted in
the ﬁgure. The differential D is rigidly attached to
the car frame. The half-axles are pivoted at their inboard ends (point O for the half-axle shown) and are
rigidly attached to the wheels. Suspension elements
not shown constrain the wheel motion to the plane
of the ﬁgure. The weight of the wheel–tire assembly
is W ϭ 100 lb, and its mass moment of inertia about
a diametral axis passing through its mass center G is
1 lb-ft-sec2. The weight of the half-axle is negligible.
The spring rate and shock-absorber damping coefﬁcient are k ϭ 50 lb/in. and c ϭ 200 lb-sec/ft, respectively. If a static tire imbalance is present, as
represented by the additional concentrated weight
w ϭ 0.5 lb as shown, determine the angular velocity
␻ which results in the suspension system being driven at its undamped natural frequency. What would
be the corresponding vehicle speed v? Determine the
damping ratio ␨. Assume small angular deﬂections
and neglect gyroscopic effects and any car frame vibration. In order to avoid the complications associated with the varying normal force exerted by the
road on the tire, treat the vehicle as being on a lift
with the wheels hanging free.

Problem 8/95
c
W

k
O

G

D

r = 14″

w
l1 = 27″
l2 = 36″
Problem 8/96

624

Chapter 8

Vibration and Time Response

8/5

Energy Methods

In Arts. 8/2 through 8/4 we derived and solved the equations of motion for vibrating bodies by isolating the body with a free-body diagram
and applying Newton’s second law of motion. With this approach, we
were able to account for the actions of all forces acting on the body, including frictional damping forces. There are many problems where the
effect of damping is small and may be neglected, so that the total energy
of the system is essentially conserved. For such systems, we ﬁnd that the
principle of conservation of energy may frequently be applied with considerable advantage in establishing the equation of motion and, when the
motion is simple harmonic, in determining the frequency of vibration.

Determining the Equation of Motion
To illustrate this alternative approach, consider ﬁrst the simple case
of the body of mass m attached to the spring of stiffness k and vibrating
in the vertical direction without damping, Fig. 8/17. As previously, we
ﬁnd it convenient to measure the motion variable x from the equilibrium position. With this datum, the total potential energy of the system,
elastic plus gravitational, becomes
k

δ st
Equilibrium
position

V ϭ Ve ϩ Vg ϭ 1 k(x ϩ ␦st)2 Ϫ 1 k␦st2 Ϫ mgx
2
2
m

x

m

where ␦st ϭ mg/k is the initial static displacement. Substituting k␦st ϭ
mg and simplifying give
V ϭ 1kx2
2

Figure 8/17

Thus, the total energy of the system becomes
T ϩ V ϭ 1 mx 2 ϩ 1 kx2
2 ˙
2
Because T ϩ V is constant for a conservative system, its time derivative is zero. Consequently,
d
(T ϩ V) ϭ mx ¨ ϩ kxx ϭ 0
˙x
˙
dt
Canceling ˙ gives us our basic differential equation of motion
x
mx ϩ kx ϭ 0
¨
which is identical to Eq. 8/1 derived in Art. 8/2 for the same system of
Fig. 8/3.

Determining the Frequency of Vibration
Conservation of energy may also be used to determine the period or
frequency of vibration for a linear conservative system, without having to
derive and solve the equation of motion. For a system which oscillates with
simple harmonic motion about the equilibrium position, from which the

Article 8/5

displacement x is measured, the energy changes from maximum kinetic
and zero potential at the equilibrium position x ϭ 0 to zero kinetic and
maximum potential at the position of maximum displacement x ϭ xmax.
Thus, we may write
Tmax ϭ Vmax
1

The maximum kinetic energy is 2 m(x max)2, and the maximum potential
˙
1
energy is 2 k(xmax)2.
For the harmonic oscillator of Fig. 8/17, we know that the displacement may be written as x ϭ xmax sin (␻nt ϩ ␺), so that the maximum velocity is ˙max ϭ ␻nxmax. Thus, we may write
x
1
1
2
2
2 m(␻nxmax) ϭ 2 k(xmax)

where xmax is the maximum displacement, at which the potential energy
is a maximum. From this energy balance, we easily obtain
␻n ϭ Ίk/m
This method of directly determining the frequency may be used for any
linear undamped vibration.
The main advantage of the energy approach for the free vibration of
conservative systems is that it becomes unnecessary to dismember the
system and account for all of the forces which act on each member. In
Art. 3/7 of Chapter 3 and in Arts. 6/6 and 6/7 of Chapter 6, we learned
for a system of interconnected bodies that an active-force diagram of the
complete system enabled us to evaluate the work UЈ of the external active forces and to equate it to the change in the total mechanical energy
T ϩ V of the system.
Thus, for a conservative mechanical system of interconnected parts
with a single degree of freedom where UЈ ϭ 0, we may obtain its equation of motion simply by setting the time derivative of its constant total
mechanical energy to zero, giving
d
(T ϩ V) ϭ 0
dt
Here V ϭ Ve ϩ Vg is the sum of the elastic and gravitational potential
energies of the system.
Also, for an interconnected mechanical system, as for a single body,
the natural frequency of vibration is obtained by equating the expression for its maximum total kinetic energy to the expression for its maximum potential energy, where the potential energy is taken to be zero at
the equilibrium position. This approach to the determination of natural
frequency is valid only if it can be determined that the system vibrates
with simple harmonic motion.

Energy Methods

625

626

Chapter 8

Vibration and Time Response

SAMPLE PROBLEM 8/10
The small sphere of mass m is mounted on the light rod pivoted at O and
supported at end A by the vertical spring of stiffness k. End A is displaced a
small distance y0 below the horizontal equilibrium position and released. By the
energy method, derive the differential equation of motion for small oscillations
of the rod and determine the expression for its natural frequency ␻n of vibration.
Damping is negligible.

Solution. With the displacement y of the end of the bar measured from the
equilibrium position, the potential energy in the displaced position for small values of y becomes

ᕡ

V ϭ V e ϩ Vg ϭ

2

΄ ΂ ΃ ϩ 1 ky ΅ ϭ 0
2
2

b
d 1
d
(T ϩ V) ϭ
m ˙
y
l
dt
dt 2

2

which yields
2 k
y
¨ ϩ l2 y ϭ 0

Ans.

b m

when ˙ is canceled. By analogy with Eq. 8/2, we may write the motion frequency
y
directly as
l
Ίk/m
b

Ans.

Alternatively, we can obtain the frequency by equating the maximum kinetic energy, which occurs at y ϭ 0, to the maximum potential energy, which occurs at y ϭ y0 ϭ ymax, where the deﬂection is a maximum. Thus,

΂

΃

b
1
m ˙max
y
2
l

2

ϭ

1
ky 2
2 max

Knowing that we have a harmonic oscillation, which can be expressed as y ϭ
y
ymax sin ␻nt, we have ˙max ϭ ymax␻n. Substituting this relation into our energy
balance gives us

΂

as before.

΃

2

ϭ

1
ky 2
2 max

so that

␻n ϭ

l
Ίk/m
b

Ans.

δ st

A
Equilibrium
position

Helpful Hints

ᕢ Here again, we note the simplicity of

where we see that the vertical displacement of m is (b/l)y. Thus, with the energy
sum constant, its time derivative is zero, and we have

b
1
m ymax␻n
2
l

k

motion of the end of the bar would
cause our expression for the deﬂection of the spring to be in error.

΂ ΃

gives

A

ᕡ For large values of y, the circular

1 2
ky
2

b
1
m ˙
y
2
l

␻n ϭ

b
—y
l
m

The kinetic energy in the displaced position is

Tmax ϭ Vmax

O

΂ ΃

Tϭ

m
l

b
1
1
k(y ϩ ␦st)2 Ϫ k␦st2 Ϫ mg y
2
2
l

Vϭ

k

O

y

where ␦st is the static deflection of the spring at equilibrium. But the force in
the spring in the equilibrium position, from a zero moment sum about O, is
(b/l)mg ϭ k␦st. Substituting this value in the expression for V and simplifying yield

ᕢ

b

the expression for potential energy
when the displacement is measured
from the equilibrium position.

Article 8/5

SAMPLE PROBLEM 8/11
Determine the natural frequency ␻n of vertical vibration of the 3-kg collar
to which are attached the two uniform 1.2-kg links, which may be treated as
slender bars. The stiffness of the spring, which is attached to both the collar and
the foundation, is k ϭ 1.5 kN/m, and the bars are both horizontal in the equilibrium position. A small roller on end B of each link permits end A to move with
the collar. Frictional retardation is negligible.

Energy Methods

627

300
mm

300
mm
3 kg

B
1.2 kg A
y

B
A 1.2 kg
k = 1.5 kN/m

Solution.

In the equilibrium position, the compression P in the spring equals
the weight of the 3-kg collar, plus half the weight of each link or P ϭ 3(9.81) ϩ
2(1)(1.2)(9.81) ϭ 41.2 N. The corresponding static deﬂection of the spring is ␦st ϭ
2
P/k ϭ 41.2/1.5(103) ϭ 27.5(10Ϫ3) m. With the displacement variable y measured
downward from the equilibrium position, which becomes the position of zero potential energy, the potential energy for each member in the displaced position is
(Spring)

Ve ϭ
ϭ

1
1
1
k(y ϩ ␦st)2 Ϫ k␦st2 ϭ ky2 ϩ k␦st y
2
2
2
1
(1.5)(103)y2 ϩ 1.5(103)(27.5)(10Ϫ3)y
2

ϭ 750y2 ϩ 41.2y J
(Collar)

ᕡ

(Each link)

Vg ϭ Ϫmc gy ϭ Ϫ3(9.81)y ϭ Ϫ29.4y J

Helpful Hints

y
y
Vg ϭ Ϫml g ϭ Ϫ1.2(9.81) ϭ Ϫ5.89y J
2
2

ᕡ Note that the mass center of each
link moves down only half as far as
the collar.

The total potential energy of the system then becomes

ᕢ

ᕢ We note again that measurement

V ϭ 750y2 ϩ 41.2y Ϫ 29.4y Ϫ 2(5.89)y ϭ 750y2 J

The maximum kinetic energy occurs at the equilibrium position, where the
velocity ˙ of the collar has its maximum value. In that position, in which links
y
ᕣ AB are horizontal, end B is the instantaneous center of zero velocity for each
link, and each link rotates with an angular velocity ˙/0.3. Thus, the kinetic eny
ergy of each part is
(Collar)
(Each link)

Tϭ

΂

΃

matics is essential at this point.

ᕤ To appreciate the advantage of the

1
1 1
1
I ␻2 ϭ
m l2 (y /l)2 ϭ ml˙2
y
˙
2 B
2 3 l
6
ϭ

work-energy method for this and
similar problems of interconnected
systems, you are encouraged to explore the steps required for solution
by the force and moment equations
of motion of the separate parts.

1
(1.2)y 2 ϭ 0.2y 2
˙
˙
6

Thus, the kinetic energy of the collar and both links is
3 2
y
˙ ϩ 2(0.2y 2) ϭ 1.9y 2
˙
˙
2

ᕥ If the oscillations were large, we

With the harmonic motion expressed by y ϭ ymax sin ␻nt, we have ˙max ϭ ymax␻n,
y
ᕤ so that the energy balance Tmax ϭ Vmax with ˙ ϭ ˙max becomes
y
y

ᕥ

ᕣ Our knowledge of rigid-body kine-

3
1
m ˙2 ϭ ˙2 J
y
y
2 c
2

Tϭ

Tϭ

of the motion variable y from the
equilibrium position results in the
total potential energy being simply
V ϭ 1 ky2.
2

1.9(ymax␻n)2 ϭ 750ymax2

or

␻n ϭ Ί750/1.9 ϭ 19.87 Hz

Ans.

would ﬁnd that the angular velocity
of each link in its general position
would equal ˙/Ί0.09 Ϫ y2, which
y
would cause a nonlinear response no
longer described by y ϭ ymax sin ␻t.

628

Chapter 8

Vibration and Time Response

PROBLEMS
(Solve the following problems by the energy method of
Art. 8/5.)

8/100 A uniform rod of mass m and length l is welded at
one end to the rim of a light circular hoop of radius
l. The other end lies at the center of the hoop. Determine the period ␶ for small oscillations about the
vertical position of the bar if the hoop rolls on the
horizontal surface without slipping.

Introductory Problems
8/97 The potential energy V of a linear spring-mass system is given in inch-pounds by 64x2, where x is the
displacement in inches measured from the neutral
equilibrium position. The kinetic energy T of the system in inch-pounds is given by 8x 2. Determine the
˙
differential equation of motion for the system and
ﬁnd the period ␶ of its oscillation. Neglect energy loss.

l

8/98 Derive the equation of motion for the pendulum
which consists of the slender uniform rod of mass m
and the bob of mass M. Assume small oscillations,
and neglect the radius of the bob.

Problem 8/100

8/101 The length of the spring is adjusted so that the equilibrium position of the arm is horizontal as shown.
Neglect the mass of the spring and the arm and calculate the natural frequency ƒn for small oscillations.

O

l

l

O

θ

m
m

b
k

M
Problem 8/98

8/99 The spoked wheel of radius r, mass m, and centroidal radius of gyration k rolls without slipping
on the incline. Determine the natural frequency of
oscillation and explore the limiting cases of k ϭ 0
and k ϭ r.

k

Problem 8/101

Representative Problems
8/102 Calculate the frequency ƒn of vertical oscillation of
the system shown. The 40-kg pulley has a radius of
gyration about its center O of 200 mm.

r
m

θ

Problem 8/99

k = 2 kN/m
300 mm
O

40 kg
kO = 200 mm

30 kg
Problem 8/102

Article 8/5
8/103 By the method of this article, determine the period of vertical oscillation. Each spring has a stiffness of 6 lb/in., and the mass of the pulleys may be
neglected.

k

Problems

629

8/106 The ends of the uniform slender bar of mass m and
length L move freely in the vertical and horizontal
slots under the action of the two precompressed
springs each of stiffness k as shown. If the bar is in
static equilibrium when ␪ ϭ 0, determine the natural frequency ␻n of small oscillations.
k

k

k

θ

50 lb

L

Problem 8/103

8/104 The homogeneous circular cylinder of Prob. 8/91, repeated here, rolls without slipping on the track of radius R. Determine the period ␶ for small oscillations.
O

R

Problem 8/106

8/107 Develop an expression for the natural circular frequency ␻n of the system of Prob. 8/23, repeated
here. The mass and friction of the pulleys are
negligible.

θ

k
r
m

G

θ

Problem 8/104

8/105 The uniform slender rod of length l and mass m2 is
secured to the uniform disk of radius l/5 and mass
m1. If the system is shown in its equilibrium position, determine the natural frequency ␻n and the
maximum angular velocity ␻ for small oscillations
of amplitude ␪0 about the pivot O.

m1
k
O
m2

l/5

l/5

2l/5
Problem 8/105

l/5

m

Problem 8/107

630

Chapter 8

Vibration and Time Response

8/108 Determine the period ␶ of vertical oscillations for
the system composed of the 140-kg frame and two
80-kg pulleys, each of which has a radius of gyration kO ϭ 400 mm. The ﬂexible wires do not slip on
the pulleys.

Vertical

k=
1050 N/m
k = 4 kN/m
80 kg
600 mm
O

45°

300 mm

80 kg

45°

300 mm

600 mm
O
A
kO = 400 mm

kO = 400 mm
140 kg
Problem 8/108

8/109 Derive the natural frequency ƒn of the system composed of two homogeneous circular cylinders, each
of mass M, and the connecting link AB of mass m.
Assume small oscillations.
M

Problem 8/110

8/111 The thin homogeneous panel of mass m is hinged
to swing freely about a ﬁxed axis which makes an
angle ␣ with the vertical. Determine the period of
small oscillations.
a
m

M

r

O

r0

O
m

r
r0

B

A

c

θ

θ

Problem 8/109

8/110 Each of the two uniform 1.5-kg slender bars is
hinged freely at A with its small upper-end guide
roller free to move in the horizontal guide. The
bars are supported in their 45Њ equilibrium positions by the vertical spring of stiffness 1050 N/m. If
point A is given a very small vertical displacement
and then released, calculate the natural frequency
of the resulting motion.

b

Problem 8/111

8/112 The 12-kg block is supported by the two 5-kg links
with two torsion springs, each of constant K ϭ 500
N ⅐ m/rad, arranged as shown. The springs are sufﬁciently stiff so that stable equilibrium is established in
the position shown. Determine the natural frequency
ƒn for small oscillations about this equilibrium position.
12 kg

5 kg

5 kg

K

K

Problem 8/112

0.8 m

Article 8/5
8/113 The semicylinder of mass m and radius r rolls without slipping on the horizontal surface. By the
method of this article, determine the period ␶ of
small oscillations.
O
_
r
r θ
G

Problems

631

8/116 The uniform slender rod of length 2b is supported
in the horizontal plane by a biﬁlar suspension. The
rod is set into small angular oscillation about the
vertical axis through its center O. Derive the expression for the period ␶ of oscillation. (Hint: From
the auxiliary sketch note that the rod rises a distance h corresponding to an angular twist ␪. Also
note that l␤ ഡ b␪ for small angles and that cos ␤
may be replaced by the ﬁrst two terms of its series
expansion. A simple harmonic solution of the form
␪ ϭ ␪0 sin ␻nt may be used for small angles.)
B

Problem 8/113

l

B

8/114 The front-end suspension of an automobile is
shown. Each of the coil springs has a stiffness of
270 lb/in. If the weight of the front-end frame and
equivalent portion of the body attached to the front
end is 1800 lb, determine the natural frequency ƒn
of vertical oscillation of the frame and body in the
absence of shock absorbers. (Hint: To relate the
spring deﬂection to the deﬂection of the frame and
body, consider the frame ﬁxed and let the ground
and wheels move vertically.)

β

l
O

b

l
b

θ

O
lβ

A

A

bθ

b
h = l(1 – cos β )

Problem 8/116

8/117 The semicircular cylindrical shell of radius r with
small but uniform wall thickness is set into small
rocking oscillation on the horizontal surface. If no
slipping occurs, determine the expression for the
period ␶ of each complete oscillation.

12″
18″

r

Problem 8/114

8/115 If the spring-loaded frame is given a slight vertical
disturbance from its equilibrium position shown,
determine its natural frequency ƒn of vibration.
The mass of the upper member is 24 kg, and that of
the lower members is negligible. Each spring has a
stiffness of 9 kN/m.

Problem 8/117

᭤ 8/118 A hole of radius R/4 is drilled through a cylinder of
radius R to form a body of mass m as shown. If the
body rolls on the horizontal surface without slipping, determine the period ␶ for small oscillations.

24 kg

R/4
R/2
R/4

150
mm

O

150
mm

100 mm

100 mm
Problem 8/115
Problem 8/118

632

Chapter 8

Vibration and Time Response

8/6

Chapter Review

In studying the vibrations of particles and rigid bodies in Chapter 8,
we have observed that the subject is simply a direct application of the
fundamental principles of dynamics as presented in Chapters 3 and 6.
However, in these previous chapters, we determined the dynamic behavior of a body only at a particular instant of time or found the changes in
motion resulting from only ﬁnite intervals of displacement or time.
Chapter 8, on the other hand, has treated the solution of the deﬁning
differential equations of motion, so that the linear or angular displacement can be fully expressed as a function of time.

Particle Vibration
We divided our study of the time response of particles into the two
categories of free and forced motion, with the further subdivisions of
negligible and signiﬁcant damping. We saw that the damping ratio ␨ is a
convenient parameter for determining the nature of unforced but viscously damped vibrations.
The prime lesson associated with harmonic forcing is that driving a
lightly damped system with a force whose frequency is near the natural
frequency can cause motion of excessively large amplitude—a condition
called resonance, which usually must be carefully avoided.
Rigid-Body Vibration
In our study of rigid-body vibrations, we observed that the equation
of small angular motion has a form identical to that for particle vibrations. Whereas particle vibrations may be described completely by the
equations governing translational motion, rigid-body vibrations usually
require the equations of rotational dynamics.
Energy Methods
In the ﬁnal article of Chapter 8, we saw how the energy method can
facilitate the determination of the natural frequency ␻n in free vibration
problems where damping may be neglected. Here the total mechanical
energy of the system is assumed to be constant. Setting its ﬁrst time derivative to zero leads directly to the differential equation of motion for
the system. The energy approach permits the analysis of a conservative
system of interconnected parts without dismembering the system.
Degrees of Freedom
Throughout the chapter, we have restricted our attention to systems
having one degree of freedom, where the position of the system can be
speciﬁed by a single variable. If a system possesses n degrees of freedom,
it has n natural frequencies. Thus, if a harmonic force is applied to such
a system which is lightly damped, there are n driving frequencies which
can cause motion of large amplitude. By a process called modal analysis,
a complex system with n degrees of freedom can be reduced to n singledegree-of-freedom systems. For this reason, the thorough understanding
of the material of this chapter is vital for the further study of vibrations.

Article 8/6

REVIEW PROBLEMS

Review Problems

A

633

B
O

8/119 Determine the value of the damping coefﬁcient c
for which the system is critically damped if k ϭ 70
kN/m and m ϭ 100 kg.

A

B
r

k

k

k

m
Problem 8/121
c

c

8/122 The block of mass M is suspended by the two uniform slender rods each of mass m. Determine the
natural frequency ␻n of small oscillations for the
system shown.

Problem 8/119

b

8/120 A 20-m I-beam is being hoisted by the cable arrangement shown. Determine the period ␶ of small oscillations about the junction O, which is assumed to
remain ﬁxed and about which the cables pivot
freely. Treat the beam as a slender rod.

l

m

O

m
a
–
–
2
a
–
–
2

G
M
b
–
–
2

b
–
–
2

Problem 8/122
45°

45°
20 m
Problem 8/120

8/123 The triangular frame is constructed of uniform
slender rod and pivots about a horizontal axis
through point O. Determine the critical driving frequency ␻c of the block B which will result in excessively large oscillations of the assembly. The total
mass of the frame is m.

8/121 The uniform circular disk is suspended by a socket
(not shown) which ﬁts over the small ball attachment at O. Determine the period of small motion if
the disk swings freely about (a) axis A-A and (b)
axis B-B. Neglect the small offset, mass, and friction of the ball.

O
sB = b sin ω t
d

d

k

B

k
d
Problem 8/123

634

Chapter 8

Vibration and Time Response

8/124 Determine the period ␶ for small oscillations of the
assembly composed of two light bars and two particles, each of mass m. Investigate your expression as
the angle ␣ approaches values of 0 and 180Њ.

O

l

8/127 Calculate the damping ratio ␨ of the system shown
if the weight and radius of gyration of the stepped
cylinder are W ϭ 20 lb and k ϭ 5.5 in., the spring
constant is k ϭ 15 lb/in., and the damping coefﬁcient of the hydraulic cylinder is c ϭ 2 lb-sec/ft.
The cylinder rolls without slipping on the radius
r ϭ 6 in. and the spring can support tension as well
as compression.
W

l
α

k

c
r

m

m

Problem 8/124

Problem 8/127

8/125 A slender rod is shaped into the semicircle of radius
r as shown. Determine the natural frequency ƒn for
small oscillations of the rod when it is pivoted on
the horizontal knife edge at the middle of its
length.

8/128 The cylinder A of radius r, mass m, and radius of
gyration k is driven by a cable-spring system attached to the drive cylinder B, which oscillates as
indicated. If the cables do not slip on the cylinders,
and if both springs are stretched to the degree that
they do not go slack during a motion cycle, determine an expression for the amplitude ␪max of the
steady-state oscillation of cylinder A.
k

ω
φ = φ0 cos wt

A

8/126 Determine the largest amplitude x0 for which the
uniform circular disk will roll without slipping on
the horizontal surface.
x
m
k/2
r

μ s, μ k
Problem 8/126

r0

k

Problem 8/125

k/2

B

r

r

Problem 8/128

8/129 With collar A held in position, a static horizontal
force of 3 lb applied to the 5-lb sphere B gives it a
deﬂection of 0.60 in. against the elastic resistance
of the slender rod of negligible mass to which it is
attached. If the collar A is given a horizontal harmonic oscillation with a frequency of 2 cycles per
second and an amplitude of 0.30 in., calculate the
amplitude X of the horizontal vibration of the
sphere. Assume negligible damping.

Article 8/6

Review Problems

635

y

A

G
A

B

B
10″

10″

Problem 8/129
Problem 8/131

8/130 The seismic instrument shown is secured to a
ship’s deck near the stern where propeller-induced
vibration is most pronounced. The ship has a single
three-bladed propeller which turns at 180 rev/min
and operates partly out of water, thus causing a
shock as each blade breaks the surface. The damping ratio of the instrument is ␨ ϭ 0.5, and its undamped natural frequency is 3 Hz. If the measured
amplitude of A relative to its frame is 0.75 mm,
compute the amplitude ␦0 of the vertical vibration
of the deck.

8/132 The uniform bar of mass M and length l has a small
roller of mass m with negligible bearing friction at
each end. Determine the period ␶ of the system for
small oscillations on the curved track.

R

A
m

l
M

Problem 8/132

Problem 8/130

8/131 An experimental engine weighing 480 lb is
mounted on a test stand with spring mounts at A
and B, each with a stiffness of 600 lb/in. The radius
of gyration of the engine about its mass center G is
4.60 in. With the motor not running, calculate the
natural frequency (ƒn)y of vertical vibration and
(ƒn)␪ of rotation about G. If vertical motion is suppressed and a light rotational imbalance occurs, at
what speed N should the engine not be run?

m

636

Chapter 8

Vibration and Time Response

*Computer-Oriented Problems
*8/133 The mass of the system shown is released with the
initial conditions x0 ϭ 0.1 m and ˙0 ϭ Ϫ5 m/s at
x
t ϭ 0. Plot the response of the system and determine the time(s) (if any) at which the displacement x ϭ Ϫ0.05 m.

*8/135 Plot the response x of the 50-lb body over the
time interval 0 Յ t Յ 1 second. Determine the
maximum and minimum values of x and their respective times. The initial conditions are x0 ϭ 0
and ˙0 ϭ 6 ft/sec.
x
x
F = (160 cos 60t) lb
100 lb/in.

18 lb-sec/ft
50 lb

100 N/m
x
Problem 8/135

2 kg

50 N·s/m

Problem 8/133

*8/134 The 10-kg oscillator contains an unbalanced motor
whose speed N in revolutions per minute can be
varied. The oscillator is restrained in its horizontal
motion by a spring of stiffness k ϭ 1080 N/m and
by a viscous damper whose piston is resisted by a
force of 30 N when moving at a speed of 0.5 m/s.
Determine the viscous damping factor ␨ and plot
the magniﬁcation factor M for motor speeds from
zero to 300 revolutions per minute. Determine the
maximum value of M and the corresponding motor
speed.

c

*8/136 Shown in the ﬁgure are the elements of a displacement meter used to study the motion yB ϭ b sin ␻t
of the base. The motion of the mass relative to
the frame is recorded on the rotating drum. If
l1 ϭ 1.2 ft, l2 ϭ 1.6 ft, l3 ϭ 2 ft, W ϭ 2 lb, c ϭ 0.1
lb-sec/ft, and ␻ ϭ 10 rad/sec, determine the range
of the spring constant k over which the magnitude
of the recorded relative displacement is less than
1.5b. It is assumed that the ratio ␻/␻n must remain greater than unity.
l3
l2
l1
k
W
O

c

yB = b sin ω t

k

Neutral
position

10 kg
Problem 8/136

Problem 8/134

Article 8/6

*8/137 The 4-kg cylinder is attached to a viscous damper
and to the spring of stiffness k ϭ 800 N/m. If the
cylinder is released from rest at time t ϭ 0 from
the position where it is displaced a distance
y ϭ 100 mm from its equilibrium position, plot
the displacement y as a function of time for the
ﬁrst second for the two cases where the viscous
damping coefﬁcient is (a) c ϭ 124 N ⅐ s/m and (b)
c ϭ 80 N ⅐ s/m.

F
k

c

k = 800 N /m

m

y

F
4 kg

c

t
Problem 8/139

Problem 8/137

*8/138 Determine and plot the response x as a function of
time for the undamped linear oscillator subjected
to the force F which varies linearly with time for
the ﬁrst 3 second as shown. The mass is initially
4
at rest with x ϭ 0 at time t ϭ 0.
F, N
6.25
F
k = 90 N/m
0.75 kg

x
0

Problem 8/138

0

3/4

t, s

637

*8/139 The damped linear oscillator of mass m ϭ 4 kg,
spring constant k ϭ 200 N/m, and viscous damping factor ␨ ϭ 0.1 is initially at rest in a neutral
position when it is subjected to a sudden impulsive
loading F over a very short period of time as
shown. If the impulse I ϭ ͐F dt ϭ 8 N ⅐ s, determine the resulting displacement x as a function of
time and plot it for the ﬁrst two seconds following
the impulse.
x

Equilibrium
position

Review Problems

A

Area Moments
of Inertia

See Appendix A of Vol. 1 Statics for a treatment of the theory and
calculation of area moments of inertia. Because this quantity plays an
important role in the design of structures, especially those dealt with in
statics, we present only a brief deﬁnition in this Dynamics volume so
that the student can appreciate the basic differences between area and
mass moments of inertia.
The moments of inertia of a plane area A about the x- and y-axes in
its plane and about the z-axis normal to its plane, Fig. A/1, are deﬁned by
Ix ϭ

͵ y dA
2

Iy ϭ

͵ x dA
2

Iz ϭ

y

͵ r dA

2

A

2

2

x

dA

2

where dA is the differential element of area and r ϭ x ϩ y . Clearly,
the polar moment of inertia Iz equals the sum Ix ϩ Iy of the rectangular
moments of inertia. For thin ﬂat plates, the area moment of inertia is
useful in the calculation of the mass moment of inertia, as explained in
Appendix B.
The area moment of inertia is a measure of the distribution of area
about the axis in question and, for that axis, is a constant property of the
area. The dimensions of area moment of inertia are (distance)4 expressed
in m4 or mm4 in SI units and ft4 or in.4 in U.S. customary units. In contrast, mass moment of inertia is a measure of the distribution of mass
about the axis in question, and its dimensions are (mass)(distance)2,
which are expressed in kg ⅐ m2 in SI units and in lb-ft-sec2 or lb-in.-sec2 in
U.S. customary units.

r

y
x

O

Figure A/1

639

B

Mass Moments
of Inertia
APPENDIX OUTLINE
B/1 Mass Moments of Inertia about an Axis
B/2 Products of Inertia

B/1

Mass Moments of Inertia about an Axis

The equation of rotational motion about an axis normal to the plane
of motion for a rigid body in plane motion contains an integral which depends on the distribution of mass with respect to the moment axis. This
integral occurs whenever a rigid body has an angular acceleration about
its axis of rotation. Thus, to study the dynamics of rotation, you should
be thoroughly familiar with the calculation of mass moments of inertia
for rigid bodies.
Consider a body of mass m, Fig. B/1, rotating about an axis O-O
with an angular acceleration ␣. All particles of the body move in parallel
planes which are normal to the rotation axis O-O. We may choose any
one of the planes as the plane of motion, although the one containing
the center of mass is usually the one so designated. An element of mass
dm has a component of acceleration tangent to its circular path equal to
r␣, and by Newton’s second law of motion the resultant tangential force
on this element equals r␣ dm. The moment of this force about the axis
O-O is r2␣ dm, and the sum of the moments of these forces for all elements is ͐r2␣ dm.
For a rigid body, ␣ is the same for all radial lines in the body and we
may take it outside the integral sign. The remaining integral is called
the mass moment of inertia I of the body about the axis O-O and is
Iϭ

͵ r dm
2

O

α
m
r

O

dm

rα dm

Figure B/1

(B/1)

This integral represents an important property of a body and is involved
in the analysis of any body which has rotational acceleration about a
641

642

Appendix B

Mass Moments of Inertia

given axis. Just as the mass m of a body is a measure of the resistance to
translational acceleration, the moment of inertia I is a measure of resistance to rotational acceleration of the body.
The moment-of-inertia integral may be expressed alternatively as
I ϭ Σ ri2mi

(B/1a)

where ri is the radial distance from the inertia axis to the representative
particle of mass mi and where the summation is taken over all particles
of the body.
If the density ␳ is constant throughout the body, the moment of inertia becomes
Iϭ␳

͵ r dV
2

where dV is the element of volume. In this case, the integral by itself deﬁnes a purely geometrical property of the body. When the density is not
constant but is expressed as a function of the coordinates of the body, it
must be left within the integral sign and its effect accounted for in the
integration process.
In general, the coordinates which best ﬁt the boundaries of the body
should be used in the integration. It is particularly important that we
make a good choice of the element of volume dV. To simplify the integration, an element of lowest possible order should be chosen, and the
correct expression for the moment of inertia of the element about the
axis involved should be used. For example, in ﬁnding the moment of inertia of a solid right-circular cone about its central axis, we may choose
an element in the form of a circular slice of inﬁnitesimal thickness, Fig.
B/2a. The differential moment of inertia for this element is the expression for the moment of inertia of a circular cylinder of inﬁnitesimal altitude about its central axis. (This expression will be obtained in Sample
Problem B/1.)
Alternatively, we could choose an element in the form of a cylindrical shell of inﬁnitesimal thickness as shown in Fig. B/2b. Because all of
the mass of the element is at the same distance r from the inertia axis,
the differential moment of inertia for this element is merely r2 dm
where dm is the differential mass of the elemental shell.
From the deﬁnition of mass moment of inertia, its dimensions are
(mass)(distance)2 and are expressed in the units kg ⅐ m2 in SI units and
lb-ft-sec2 in U.S. customary units.

r

(a)

(b)

Figure B/2

Article B/1

Mass Moments of Inertia about an Axis

643

Radius of Gyration
The radius of gyration k of a mass m about an axis for which the
moment of inertia is I is deﬁned as
(B/2)
Thus, k is a measure of the distribution of mass of a given body about
the axis in question, and its deﬁnition is analogous to the deﬁnition of
the radius of gyration for area moments of inertia. If all the mass m of a
body could be concentrated at a distance k from the axis, the moment of
inertia would be unchanged.
The moment of inertia of a body about a particular axis is frequently indicated by specifying the mass of the body and the radius of
gyration of the body about the axis. The moment of inertia is then calculated from Eq. B/2.

Transfer of Axes
If the moment of inertia of a body is known about an axis passing
through the mass center, it may be determined easily about any parallel
axis. To prove this statement, consider the two parallel axes in Fig. B/3,
one being an axis through the mass center G and the other a parallel
axis through some other point C. The radial distances from the two axes
to any element of mass dm are r0 and r, and the separation of the axes is
d. Substituting the law of cosines r2 ϭ r02 ϩ d2 ϩ 2r0 d cos ␪ into the definition for the moment of inertia about the axis through C gives

͵ r dm ϭ ͵ (r ϩ d ϩ 2r d cos ␪) dm
ϭ ͵ r dm ϩ d ͵ dm ϩ 2d ͵ u dm

Iϭ

2

0

0

2

2

2

dm

m
r0

r
G
d
C

θ u

O

0

2

Figure B/3

The ﬁrst integral is the moment of inertia I about the mass-center axis,
the second term is md2, and the third integral equals zero, since the ucoordinate of the mass center with respect to the axis through G is zero.
Thus, the parallel-axis theorem is
I ϭ I ϩ md2

(B/3)

Remember that the transfer cannot be made unless one axis passes
through the center of mass and unless the axes are parallel.
When the expressions for the radii of gyration are substituted in Eq.
B/3, there results
k2 ϭ k2 ϩ d2

(B/3a)

Equation B/3a is the parallel-axis theorem for obtaining the radius of
gyration k about an axis which is a distance d from a parallel axis
through the mass center, for which the radius of gyration is k.

u

644

Appendix B

Mass Moments of Inertia

y
dm
x

t

r

y

x

O

For plane-motion problems where rotation occurs about an axis
normal to the plane of motion, a single subscript for I is sufficient to
designate the inertia axis. Thus, if the plate of Fig. B/4 has plane motion
in the x-y plane, the moment of inertia of the plate about the z-axis
through O is designated IO. For three-dimensional motion, however,
where components of rotation may occur about more than one axis, we
use a double subscript to preserve notational symmetry with product-ofinertia terms, which are described in Art. B/2. Thus, the moments of inertia about the x-, y-, and z-axes are labeled Ixx, Iyy, and Izz, respectively,
and from Fig. B/5 we see that they become

z

͵r
ϭ͵ r
ϭ͵ r

Ixx ϭ

Figure B/4

x

Iyy

y

Izz

z

2

2

2

͵ (y ϩ z ) dm
dm ϭ ͵ (z ϩ x ) dm
dm ϭ ͵ (x ϩ y ) dm
dm ϭ

2

2

2

2

2

2

(B/4)

These integrals are cited in Eqs. 7/10 of Art. 7/7 on angular momentum
in three-dimensional rotation.
The deﬁning expressions for mass moments of inertia and area moments of inertia are similar. An exact relationship between the two moment-of-inertia expressions exists in the case of ﬂat plates. Consider the
ﬂat plate of uniform thickness in Fig. B/4. If the constant thickness is t
and the density is ␳, the mass moment of inertia Izz of the plate about
the z-axis normal to the plate is

Izz ϭ

͵ r dm ϭ ␳t ͵ r dA ϭ ␳tI
2

2

z

(B/5)

Thus, the mass moment of inertia about the z-axis equals the mass per
unit area ␳t times the polar moment of inertia Iz of the plate area about
the z-axis. If t is small compared with the dimensions of the plate in its

z

dm
rz
ry
rx

z

x
O

y
x

Figure B/5

y

Article B/1

Mass Moments of Inertia about an Axis

plane, the mass moments of inertia Ixx and Iyy of the plate about the x- and
y-axes are closely approximated by

͵ y dm ϭ ␳t ͵ y dA ϭ ␳tI
ϭ ͵ x dm ϭ ␳t ͵ x dA ϭ ␳tI

Ixx ϭ

2

2

Iyy

2

2

x

(B/6)
y

Thus, the mass moments of inertia equal the mass per unit area ␳t times
the corresponding area moments of inertia. The double subscripts for
mass moments of inertia distinguish these quantities from area moments of inertia.
Inasmuch as Iz ϭ Ix ϩ Iy for area moments of inertia, we have
Izz ϭ Ixx ϩ Iyy

(B/7)

which holds only for a thin ﬂat plate. This restriction is observed from
Eqs. B/6, which do not hold true unless the thickness t or the z-coordinate
of the element is negligible compared with the distance of the element
from the corresponding x- or y-axis. Equation B/7 is very useful when
dealing with a differential mass element taken as a ﬂat slice of differential
thickness, say, dz. In this case, Eq. B/7 holds exactly and becomes
dIzz ϭ dIxx ϩ dIyy

(B/7a)

for axes x and y in the plane of the plate.

Composite Bodies
As in the case of area moments of inertia, the mass moment of inertia of a composite body is the sum of the moments of inertia of the individual parts about the same axis. It is often convenient to treat a
composite body as deﬁned by positive volumes and negative volumes.
The moment of inertia of a negative element, such as the material removed to form a hole, must be considered a negative quantity.
A summary of some of the more useful formulas for mass moments
of inertia of various masses of common shape is given in Table D/4,
Appendix D.
The problems which follow the sample problems are divided into
the categories Integration Exercises and Composite and Parallel-Axis
Exercises. The parallel-axis theorem will also be useful in some of the
problems in the first category.

645

646

Appendix B

Mass Moments of Inertia

SAMPLE PROBLEM B/1
Determine the moment of inertia and radius of gyration of a homogeneous
right-circular cylinder of mass m and radius r about its central axis O-O.

t
dθ

O

dr0
r0

An element of mass in cylindrical coordinates is dm ϭ ␳ dV ϭ
ᕡ ␳tr0 dr0 d␪, where ␳ is the density of the cylinder. The moment of inertia about
the axis of the cylinder is

Solution.

ᕢ

Iϭ

͵r

0

͵ ͵
2␲

2

dm ϭ ␳t

0

r

0

r03 dr0 d␪ ϭ ␳t

␲r4 1
ϭ 2 mr2
2

Ans.

r

O

Helpful Hints

ᕡ If we had started with a cylindrical

The radius of gyration is
Ans.

shell of radius r0 and axial length t
as our mass element dm, then dI ϭ
r02 dm directly. You should evaluate
the integral.

ᕢ The result I ϭ 1 mr2 applies only to a
2

solid homogeneous circular cylinder
and cannot be used for any other
wheel of circular periphery.

SAMPLE PROBLEM B/2

y

Determine the moment of inertia and radius of gyration of a homogeneous
solid sphere of mass m and radius r about a diameter.

dx

x

y
x

Solution.

A circular slice of radius y and thickness dx is chosen as the volume
element. From the results of Sample Problem B/1, the moment of inertia about
the x-axis of the elemental cylinder is

ᕡ

dIxx ϭ 1 (dm)y2 ϭ 1 (␲␳y2 dx)y2 ϭ
2
2

␲␳ 2
(r Ϫ x2)2 dx
2

where ␳ is the constant density of the sphere. The total moment of inertia about
the x-axis is
␲␳
Ixx ϭ
2

͵

r

Ϫr

(r2

Ϫ

x 2) 2

r

8
dx ϭ 15 ␲␳r5 ϭ 2 mr2
5

Ans.

The radius of gyration about the x-axis is
Ans.

Helpful Hint

ᕡ Here is an example where we utilize
a previous result to express the moment of inertia of the chosen element, which in this case is a rightcircular cylinder of differential axial
length dx. It would be foolish to
start with a third-order element,
such as ␳ dx dy dz, when we can easily solve the problem with a ﬁrstorder element.

Article B/1

Mass Moments of Inertia about an Axis

SAMPLE PROBLEM B/3
x

Determine the moments of inertia of the homogeneous rectangular parallelepiped of mass m about the centroidal x0- and z-axes and about the x-axis
through one end.

x′

Solution. A transverse slice of thickness dz is selected as the element of volume. The moment of inertia of this slice of inﬁnitesimal thickness equals the moment of inertia of the area of the section times the mass per unit area ␳ dz. Thus,
the moment of inertia of the transverse slice about the yЈ-axis is

y′

l/2

z
x0

l/2

dz

a

G

y
y0

647

b

1
dIyЈyЈ ϭ (␳ dz)(12 ab3)

and that about the xЈ-axis is

ᕡ

Helpful Hint
1
dIxЈxЈ ϭ (␳ dz)(12 a3b)

ᕡ Refer to Eqs. B/6 and recall the ex-

As long as the element is a plate of differential thickness, the principle given by
Eq. B/7a may be applied to give
dIzz ϭ dIxЈxЈ ϩ dIyЈyЈ ϭ (␳ dz)

ab 2
(a ϩ b2)
12

These expressions may now be integrated to obtain the desired results.
The moment of inertia about the z-axis is
Izz ϭ

͵ dI

zz

ϭ

␳ab 2
(a ϩ b2)
12

͵ dz ϭ
l

0

1
2
2
12 m(a ϩ b )

Ans.

where m is the mass of the block. By interchange of symbols, the moment of inertia about the x0-axis is
1
Ix0 x0 ϭ 12 m(a2 ϩ l2)

Ans.

The moment of inertia about the x-axis may be found by the parallel-axis theorem, Eq. B/3. Thus,

΂2l ΃

Ixx ϭ Ix0 x0 ϩ m

2

1
ϭ 12 m(a2 ϩ 4l2)

Ans.

This last result may be obtained by expressing the moment of inertia of the elemental slice about the x-axis and integrating the expression over the length of
the bar. Again, by the parallel-axis theorem
1
dIxx ϭ dIxЈxЈ ϩ z2 dm ϭ (␳ dz)(12 a3b) ϩ z2␳ab dz ϭ ␳ab

a
΂12 ϩ z ΃ dz
2

2

Integrating gives the result obtained previously:
a
͵ ΂12 ϩ z ΃ dz ϭ ␳abl ΂l ϩ a4 ΃ ϭ
3
l

Ixx ϭ ␳ab

0

2

2

2

2

1
2
2
12 m(a ϩ 4l )

The expression for Ixx may be simpliﬁed for a long prismatic bar or slender
rod whose transverse dimensions are small compared with the length. In this
case, a2 may be neglected compared with 4l2, and the moment of inertia of such a
slender bar about an axis through one end normal to the bar becomes I ϭ 1 ml2.
3
By the same approximation, the moment of inertia about a centroidal axis nor1
mal to the bar is I ϭ 12 ml2.

pression for the area moment of inertia of a rectangle about an axis
through its center parallel to its
base.

z

648

Appendix B

Mass Moments of Inertia

SAMPLE PROBLEM B/4

Parabolic

The upper edge of the thin homogeneous plate of mass m is parabolic with a
vertical slope at the origin O. Determine its mass moments of inertia about the
x-, y-, and z-axes.

y
t

h
y
x

Solution. We begin by clearly establishing the function associated with the upper

ᕡ boundary. From y ϭ kΊx evaluated at (x, y) ϭ (b, h), we ﬁnd that k ϭ h /Ίb so
h
Ίx. We choose a transverse slice of thickness dx for the integrations
that y ϭ
Ίb
leading to Ixx and Iyy. The mass of this slice is

dx
x
b

O

z

dm ϭ ␳ty dx
and the total mass of the plate is

ᕢ

mϭ

͵ dm ϭ ͵

Helpful Hints

͵

b

h
2
␳ty dx ϭ ␳t Ίx dx ϭ 3 ␳thb
0
Ίb

ᕡ If we have y ϭ kx2, saying that “y gets
large faster than x” helps establish
that the parabola opens upward.
Here, we have y2 ϭ k2x, which says
that “x gets large faster than y”,
helping establish that the parabola
opens rightward.

The moment of inertia of the slice about the x-axis is
dIxx ϭ 1 dm y2 ϭ 1(␳ty dx)y2 ϭ 1␳ty3 dx
3
3
3

ᕣ

For the entire plate, we have
Ixx ϭ

͵

dIxx ϭ

͵

b

0

1
3 ␳t

΂

h
Ίx
Ίb

΃

3

ᕢ For a full b by h rectangular plate of

2
dx ϭ 15␳th3b

thickness t, the mass would be ␳thb
(density times volume). So the factor
of 2 for the parabolic plate makes
3
sense.

In terms of the mass m:
2

ᕤ

Ixx ϭ 15␳th3b

΂ ΃
m

2
3 ␳thb

ϭ 1mh2
5

Ans.

The moment of inertia of the element about the y-axis is
dIyy ϭ dm y2 ϭ (␳ty dx)y2 ϭ ␳ty3 dx

width b.

h
͵ dI ϭ ͵ ␳t ΂ΊbΊx΃ dx ϭ
b

Iyy ϭ

m and length l, the moment of inertia about an axis perpendicular to
the rod and passing through one end
is 1ml2.
3

ᕤ Note that Ixx is independent of the

For the entire plate,

ᕥ

ᕣ Recall that for a slender rod of mass

yy

3

0

2
3
7 ␳thb

΂ ΃
m

2
3 ␳thb

ϭ 3mb2
7

Ans.

ᕥ Note that Iyy is independent of the
height h.

For thin plates which lie in the x-y plane,
1

3

Izz ϭ Ixx ϩ Iyy ϭ 5mh2 ϩ 7mb2

΂h5 ϩ 3b ΃
7

Izz ϭ m

2

2

Ans.

Article B/1

Mass Moments of Inertia about an Axis

SAMPLE PROBLEM B/5

y

The radius of the homogeneous solid of revolution is proportional to the
square of its x-coordinate. If the mass of the body is m, determine its mass moments of inertia about the x- and y-axes.
We begin by writing the boundary in the x-y plane as y ϭ kx . The
constant k is determined by evaluating this equation at the point (x, y) ϭ
r
(h, r): r ϭ kh2, which gives k ϭ r/h2, so that y ϭ 2 x2.
h
As is usually convenient for bodies with axial symmetry, we choose a disk- z
shaped slice as our differential element, as shown in the given ﬁgure. The mass
of this element is

h
y′

2

Solution.

ᕡ

O
y
x
r

dx

dm ϭ ␳␲y2 dx
where ␳ represents the density of the body. The moment of inertia of the element about the x-axis is

ᕢ

1

1

1

dIxx ϭ 2 dm y2 ϭ 2(␳␲y2 dx) y2 ϭ 2␳␲y4 dx
r
͵ dm ϭ ͵ ␳␲y dx ϭ͵ ␳␲ ΂hr x ΃ dx ϭ ␳␲ h x5 ͯ ϭ
h

mϭ

h

2

2

0

2

2

2

0

its face times its thickness. Then
density times volume gives mass.

5

4

h
0

1
2
5 ␳␲r h

ᕢ From Sample Problem B/1, the mass

and the moment of inertia of the entire body is
Ixx ϭ

͵ dI ϭ ͵
xx

h

0

1
4
2 ␳␲y dx ϭ

͵

h

0

1
2 ␳␲

΂hr x ΃
2

4

2

moment of inertia of a uniform
cylinder (or disk) about its longitudinal axis is 1 mr2.
2

1
dx ϭ 18␳␲r4h

All that remains is to express Ixx more conventionally in terms of its mass. We do
so by writing

ᕤ
ᕥ

1

Ixx ϭ 18␳␲r4h

m
΂ ␳␲r h΃ ϭ
1
5

2

5
2
18 mr

Ans.

By the parallel-axis theorem, the moment of inertia of the disk-shaped
element about the y-axis is
dIyy ϭ dIyЈyЈ ϩ x2 dm ϭ 1 dm y2 ϩ x2 dm
4

΂΂

1
ϭ dm 4

ϭ ␳␲

r 2
x
h2

΃

2

ϩ x2

r
΂hr x ΃ ΂1 h
4
2

2

2

2

4

΃

΂

1 r2 4
ϭ ␳␲y2 dx
x ϩ x2
4 h4

΃

x4 ϩ x2 dx ϭ ␳␲

΃

΂

r
r
͵ dI ϭ ͵ ␳␲ h ΂1 h
4
h

yy

ϭ ␳␲r2h

2

0

2

4

4

΃

r2 1 r2 8
x ϩ x6 dx
h4 4 h4

΃

x8 ϩ x6 dx ϭ ␳␲

΂

r2 1 r2 x9 x7
ϩ
7
h 4 4 h4 9

΃ͯ

h
0

r
΂36 ϩ h7 ΃
2

2

Finally, we multiply by the same unit expression as above to obtain a result in
terms of the body mass m.
Iyy ϭ ␳␲r2h

r
΂36 ϩ h7 ΃ ΂
2

2

m
1
2
5 ␳␲r h

΃

r
΂36 ϩ h7 ΃

ϭ 5m

2

2

ᕣ Remember to regard an integral operation as an inﬁnite summation.

ᕤ The parenthetical expression here is
unity, because its numerator and
denominator are equal.

ᕥ We note that Ixx is independent of h.
So the body could be compressed to
h ഡ 0 or elongated to a large value of
h with no resulting change in Ixx.
This is true because no particle of
the body would be changing its distance from the x-axis.

For the entire body, we have
Iyy ϭ

Helpful Hints

ᕡ The volume of a disk is the area of

The mass of the entire body is

ᕣ

649

Ans.

x

650

Appendix B

Mass Moments of Inertia

PROBLEMS

y
L
—
2

Integration Exercises
B/1 Use the mass element dm ϭ ␳ dx, where ␳ is the mass
per unit length, and determine the mass moments of
inertia Iyy and IyЈyЈ of the homogeneous slender rod of
mass m and length l.

β

L
—
2

x

m

y′

Problem B/3
y

B/4 Determine the mass moment of inertia of the uniform
thin triangular plate of mass m about the x-axis. Also
determine the radius of gyration about the x-axis. By
analogy state Iyy and ky. Then determine Izz and kz.

x
dx
dm

l/2

y
x

l/2

Problem B/1

m

B/2 In order to better appreciate the greater ease of integration with lower-order elements, determine the
mass moment of inertia Ixx of the homogeneous thin
plate by using the square element (a) and then by
using the rectangular element (b). The mass of the
plate is m. Then by inspection state Iyy, and ﬁnally,
determine Izz.
b
—
2

x

h

b

z
Problem B/4

y

B/5 Calculate the moment of inertia of the tapered steel
rod of circular cross section about an axis normal to
the rod through O. Note that the rod diameter is
small compared with its length.

b
—
2

t
(a)

dy

a
—
2

dx
a
—
2

(b)
z

100 mm
x

dx
Problem B/2

B/3 Determine the mass moments of inertia about the x-,
y-, and z- axes of the slender rod of length L and mass
m which makes an angle ␤ with the x- axis as shown.

10 mm
O
5 mm
Problem B/5

Article B/1
B/6 Determine the mass moment of inertia of the uniform
thin equilateral triangular plate of mass m about the
x-axis. Also determine the corresponding radius of
gyration.

Problems

651

y
b
––
2

b
––
2

y

Parabolic

h

b

x

m

b
x
z
b
––
2

b
––
2

Problem B/9
z

Problem B/6

B/10 Determine the mass of inertia about the y- axis for
the parabolic plate of the previous problem. State
the radius of gyration about the y- axis.

B/7 Determine the mass moment of inertia about the
y-axis for the equilateral triangular plate of the previous problem. Also determine its radius of gyration
about the y-axis.

B/11 Calculate the moment of the homogeneous rightcircular cone of mass m, base radius r, and altitude h
about the cone axis x and about the y- axis through
its vertex.

B/8 Determine the mass moments of inertia of the thin
parabolic plate of mass m about the x-, y-, and z- axes.

y

h

y

r

y = kx2

x

h

z

b
x
Problem B/8

B/9 Determine the mass moment of inertia of the uniform
thin parabolic plate of mass m about the x- axis. State
the corresponding radius of gyration.

Problem B/11

652

Appendix B

Mass Moments of Inertia

B/12 Determine the mass moment of inertia of the uniform thin elliptical plate (mass m) about the x- axis.
Then, by analogy, state the expression for Iyy.
Finally, determine Izz.

y

y

πx
y = b sin ––
a

b
Elliptical

m
z

m

b

a
x
Problem B/15

a

z

x

B/16 Determine the radius of gyration about the z-axis of
the paraboloid of revolution shown. The mass of the
homogenous body is m.
z

Problem B/12

r

B/13 Determine the mass moment of inertia of the
homogeneous solid of revolution of mass m about
the x- axis.
h
y

h
y=

y
x

kx1.5

Problem B/16

r
z
x
m

B/17 Determine the moment of inertia about the y- axis
for the paraboloid of revolution of Prob. B/16.
B/18 Determine the mass moment of inertia about the
x- axis of the solid spherical segment of mass m.

Problem B/13
y

B/14 Determine the mass moment of inertia of the homogeneous solid of revolution of the previous problem
about the y- and z- axes.

R
—
2

R
—
2

B/15 Determine the mass moment of inertia about the
x- axis for the uniform thin plate of mass m shown.

x

Problem B/18

Article B/1

Problems

653

B/19 Determine the moment of inertia about the x- axis of
the homogeneous solid semiellipsoid of revolution
having mass m.

a

y
a

z

R

b

Problem B/22
x

Problem B/19

B/20 A homogeneous solid of mass m is formed by revolving the 45Њ right triangle about the z- axis. Determine
the radius of gyration of the solid about the z- axis.

B/23 The plane area shown in the top portion of the ﬁgure
is rotated 180Њ about the x- axis to form the body of
revolution of mass m shown in the lower portion
of the ﬁgure. Determine the mass moment of inertia of
the body about the x- axis.
y
Parabolic

z
2b
b

a

x
b

a

2b

a

r

L
––
2

L
––
2

Problem B/20

B/21 Determine by integration the moment of inertia of
the half-cylindrical shell of mass m about the axis
a-a. The thickness of the shell is small compared
with r.

y

m
l/2
a
l/2
a
x
r
L
––
2
Problem B/21

B/22 Determine the moment of inertia about the generating axis of a complete ring (torus) of mass m having
a circular section with the dimensions shown in the
sectional view.

L
––
2
Problem B/23

654

Appendix B

Mass Moments of Inertia
x

B/24 Determine Iyy for the homogen eous body of revolution of the previous problem.
B/25 The thickness of the homogeneous triangular plate of
mass m varies linearly with the distance from the vertex toward the base. The thickness a at the base is
small compared with the other dimensions. Determine
the moment of inertia of the plate about the y- axis
along the centerline of the base.

z

r

z

x

y
a
Problem B/28
b
—
2

h

y

b
—
2

B/29 Determine the moment of inertia of the one-quartercylindrical shell of mass m about the x-x axis. The
thickness of the shell is small compared with r.
x

Problem B/25

B/26 Determine the moment of inertia of the triangular
plate described in Prob. B/25 about the z- axis.
B/27 Determine the moment of inertia, about the generating axis, of the hollow circular tube of mass m obtained by revolving the thin ring shown in the
sectional view completely around the generating axis.

r

b
–
2
R
x
a

Problem B/27

b
–
2

Problem B/29

᭤ B/30 A shell of mass m is obtained by revolving the
quarter-circular section about the z- axis. If the
thickness of the shell is small compared with a and if
r ϭ a/3, determine the radius of gyration of the shell
about the z- axis.

B/28 Determine the moments of inertia of the half-spherical
shell with respect to the x- and z- axes. The mass of
the shell is m, and its thickness is negligible compared with the radius r.

a

r
z

Problem B/30

Article B/1

Problems

655

Composite and Parallel-Axis Exercises
B/31 The two small spheres of mass m each are connected
by the light rigid rod which lies in the x-z plane. Determine the mass moments of inertia of the assembly
about the x-, y-, and z- axes.

r

y
L

m

d

L

L

L

m

z

x

Problem B/31

B/32 State without calculation the moment of inertia about
the z- axis of the thin conical shell of mass m and radius r from the results of Sample Problem B/1 applied
to a circular disk. Observe the radial distribution of
mass by viewing the cone along the z-axis.

Problem B/33

B/34 Every “slender” rod has a ﬁnite radius r. Refer to
Table D/4 and derive an expression for the percentage
error e which results if one neglects the radius r of a
homogeneous solid cylindrical rod of length l when
calculating its moment of inertia Izz. Evaluate your
expression for the ratios r/l ϭ 0.01, 0.1, and 0.5.
z

l
—
2

l
—
2

z

r

r
Problem B/34

h

B/35 Calculate the mass moment of inertia about the axis
O-O for the uniform 10-in. block of steel with crosssection dimensions of 6 and 8 in.

O

Problem B/32

B/33 The moment of inertia of a solid homogeneous cylinder of radius r about an axis parallel to the central
axis of the cylinder may be obtained approximately by
multiplying the mass of the cylinder by the square of
the distance d between the two axes. What percentage
error e results if (a) d ϭ 10r and (b) d ϭ 2r?

10″

6″

3″
8″
3″
O
Problem B/35

O

656

Appendix B

Mass Moments of Inertia

B/36 Determine Ixx for the cylinder with a centered circular hole. The mass of the body is m.

r2

B/39 Determine the moment of inertia of the half-ring of
mass m about its diametral axis a-a and about axis
b-b through the midpoint of the arc normal to the
plane of the ring. The radius of the circular cross
section is small compared with r.

r1

b
a

x
r
m

Problem B/36

B/37 Determine the mass moment of inertia about the
z- axis for the right-circular cylinder with a central
longitudinal hole.

a
b
Problem B/39

z

L
––
2

B/40 The semicircular disk weighs 5 lb, and its small
thickness may be neglected compared with its 10-in.
radius. Compute the moments of inertia of the disk
about the x-, y-, yЈ-, and z- axes.

L
––
2

2r

r

y′

m

z

y

10 ″

Problem B/37

x

B/38 Determine the moment of inertia of the mallet about
the x- axis. The density of the wooden handle is
800 kg/m3 and that of the soft-metal head is
9000 kg/m3. The longitudinal axis of the cylindrical
head is normal to the x- axis. State any assumptions.
40
mm

Problem B/40

B/41 A 6-in. steel cube is cut along its diagonal plane. Calculate the moment of inertia of the resulting prism
about the edge x-x.

50
mm
50
mm

300
mm

30 mm

6″
x

x
6″

6″

Problem B/38
x
Problem B/41

Article B/1
B/42 Determine the length L of each of the slender rods of
mass m/2 which must be centrally attached to the
faces of the thin homogeneous disk of mass m in
order to make the mass moments of inertia of the
unit about the x- and z- axes equal.

Problems

657

B/44 As a sorting-machine part, the steel half-cylinder is
subject to rapid angular acceleration and deceleration about the y-axis, and its moment of inertia about
this axis is required in the design of the machine.
Calculate Iyy. Use Tables D/1 and D/4 as needed.

z
z

y

90 mm

m
—
2
40
mm

L
m

r

x
80
mm

x
m
—
2

L

Problem B/44

Problem B/42

B/43 A badminton racket is constructed of uniform slender rods bent into the shape shown. Neglect the
strings and the built-up wooden grip and estimate
the mass moment of inertia about the y- axis through
O, which is the location of the player’s hand. The
mass per unit length of the rod material is ␳.

B/45 Calculate the moment of inertia of the steel control
wheel, shown in section, about its central axis.
There are eight spokes, each of which has a constant
cross-sectional area of 200 mm2. What percent n of
the total moment of inertia is contributed by the
outer rim?
75

200 mm2

y
120
L
—
8
50 100 300 400
O
L
—
4

L
—
4

L
Problem B/43
Dimensions in millimeters
Problem B/45

658

Appendix B

Mass Moments of Inertia

B/46 The uniform rod of length 4b and mass m is bent
into the shape shown. The diameter of the rod is
small compared with its length. Determine the moments of inertia of the rod about the three coordinate axes.

B/48 The clock pendulum consists of the slender rod of
length l and mass m and the bob of mass 7m. Neglect
the effects of the radius of the bob and determine IO
in terms of the bob position x. Calculate the ratio R of
IO evaluated for x ϭ 3l to IO evaluated for x ϭ l.
4

y
O
b
x
l

z
O
b
7m

x

m

b

Problem B/48
b

B/49 Determine the moment of inertia about the x- axis of
the portion of the homogeneous sphere shown. The
mass of the sphere portion is m.

Problem B/46

y

B/47 Calculate the moment of inertia of the solid steel
semicylinder about the x-x axis and about the parallel x0 -x0 axis. (See Table D/1 for the density of steel.)

100 mm

R
—
2

x

x0
x

Problem B/49

60 mm

60
mm
x
x0
Problem B/47

R
—
2

B/50 A square plate with a quarter-circular sector removed has a net mass m. Determine its moment of
inertia about axis A-A normal to the plane of the
plate.
A

a

y

a
z
a

A

O
Problem B/50

x

Article B/1
B/51 Determine the moments of inertia about the tangent
x-x axis for the full ring of mass m1 and the half-ring
of mass m2.

659

B/54 The machine element is made of steel and is designed
to rotate about axis O-O. Calculate its radius of gyration kO about this axis.
30

80

m1

80

r

x

Problems

r

x

m2

O
40

x

O

x

Problem B/51

B/52 The slender metal rods are welded together in the
conﬁguration shown. Each 6-in. segment weighs
0.30 lb. Compute the moment of inertia of the assembly about the y- axis.

Dimensions in millimeters
Problem B/54

B/55 Determine Ixx for the cone frustum, which has base
radii r1 and r2 and mass m.
–
y

6″
z

6″

r2

x

x

6″

6″
6″

G

r1
y
h

Problem B/52

B/53 The welded assembly shown is made from a steel rod
which weighs 0.667 lb per foot of length. Calculate the
moment of inertia of the assembly about the x-x axis.
x
8″

Problem B/55

᭤B/56 By direct integration, determine the moment of inertia about the Z- axis of the thin semicircular disk of
mass m and radius R inclined at an angle ␪ from the
X-y plane.
x

x

8″

X

8″
8″

8″
R

Problem B/53

z

Z
y
Problem B/56

660

Appendix B

Mass Moments of Inertia

B/2

Products of Inertia

For problems in the rotation of three-dimensional rigid bodies, the
expression for angular momentum contains, in addition to the momentof-inertia terms, product-of-inertia terms deﬁned as

͵ xy dm
ϭ ͵ xz dm
ϭ ͵ yz dm

Ixy ϭ Iyx ϭ
Ixz ϭ Izx
Iyz ϭ Izy

These expressions were cited in Eqs. 7/10 in the expansion of the expression for angular momentum, Eq. 7/9.
The calculation of products of inertia involves the same basic procedure which we have followed in calculating moments of inertia and in
evaluating other volume integrals as far as the choice of element and
the limits of integration are concerned. The only special precaution we
need to observe is to be doubly watchful of the algebraic signs in the expressions. Whereas moments of inertia are always positive, products of
inertia may be either positive or negative. The units of products of inertia are the same as those of moments of inertia.
We have seen that the calculation of moments of inertia is often
simpliﬁed by using the parallel-axis theorem. A similar theorem exists
for transferring products of inertia, and we prove it easily as follows. In
Fig. B/6 is shown the x-y view of a rigid body with parallel axes x0-y0
passing through the mass center G and located from the x-y axes by the
distances dx and dy. The product of inertia about the x-y axes by deﬁnition is

y0

y
dx

x0
dm

y0

G

x0

͵ xy dm ϭ ͵ (x ϩ d )(y ϩ d ) dm
ϭ ͵ x y dm ϩ d d ͵ dm ϩ d ͵ y dm ϩ d ͵ x dm

Ixy ϭ

dy
x

O

0

0 0

Figure B/6

(B/8)

x

x

y

0

y

x

0

y

0

ϭ Ix0 y0 ϩ mdx dy
The last two integrals vanish since the ﬁrst moments of mass about the
mass center are necessarily zero.
Similar relations exist for the remaining two product-of-inertia
terms. Dropping the zero subscripts and using the bar to designate the
mass-center quantity, we obtain

Ixy ϭ Ixy ϩ mdxdy
Ixz ϭ Ixz ϩ mdxdz
Iyz ϭ Iyz ϩ mdydz

(B/9)

Article B/2

Products of Inertia

These transfer-of-axis relations are valid only for transfer to or from
parallel axes through the mass center.
With the aid of the product-of-inertia terms, we can calculate the
moment of inertia of a rigid body about any prescribed axis through the
coordinate origin. For the rigid body of Fig. B/7, suppose we must determine the moment of inertia about axis O-M. The direction cosines of
O-M are l, m, n, and a unit vector ␭ along O-M may be written ␭ ϭ li ϩ
mj ϩ nk. The moment of inertia about O-M is
IM ϭ

M
␭

dm
h

͵ h dm ϭ ͵ (r ؋ ␭) ⅐ (r ؋ ␭) dm
2

r
z

where ͉r ؋ ␭͉ ϭ r sin ␪ ϭ h. The cross product is

θ

y
O

(r ؋ ␭) ϭ (yn Ϫ zm)i ϩ (zl Ϫ xn)j ϩ (xm Ϫ yl)k

x

and, after we collect terms, the dot-product expansion gives

Figure B/7
(r ؋ ␭) ⅐ (r ؋ ␭) ϭ h2 ϭ (y2 ϩ z2)l2 ϩ (x2 ϩ z2)m2 ϩ (x2 ϩ y2)n2
Ϫ 2xylm Ϫ 2xzln Ϫ 2yzmn
Thus, with the substitution of the expressions of Eqs. B/4 and B/8, we
have
IM ϭ Ixxl2 ϩ Iyym2 ϩ Izzn2 Ϫ 2Ixylm Ϫ 2Ixzln Ϫ 2Iyzmn

(B/10)

This expression gives the moment of inertia about any axis O-M in
terms of the direction cosines of the axis and the moments and products
of inertia about the coordinate axes.

Principal Axes of Inertia
As noted in Art. 7/7, the array

whose elements appear in the expansion of the angular-momentum expression, Eq. 7/11, for a rigid body with attached axes, is called the inertia matrix or inertia tensor. If we examine the moment- and
product-of-inertia terms for all possible orientations of the axes with respect to the body for a given origin, we will ﬁnd in the general case an
orientation of the x-y-z axes for which the product-of-inertia terms vanish and the array takes the diagonalized form

661

662

Appendix B

Mass Moments of Inertia

Such axes x-y-z are called the principal axes of inertia, and Ixx, Iyy, and Izz
are called the principal moments of inertia and represent the maximum,
minimum, and intermediate values of the moments of inertia for the
particular origin chosen.
It may be shown* that for any given orientation of axes x-y-z the solution of the determinant equation

(B/11)

for I yields three roots I1, I2, and I3 of the resulting cubic equation which
are the three principal moments of inertia. Also, the direction cosines l,
m, and n of a principal inertia axis are given by
(Ixx Ϫ I)l Ϫ Ixym Ϫ Ixzn ϭ 0
ϪIyxl ϩ (Iyy Ϫ I)m Ϫ Iyzn ϭ 0

(B/12)

ϪIzxl Ϫ Izym ϩ (Izz Ϫ I)n ϭ 0
These equations along with l2 ϩ m2 ϩ n2 ϭ 1 will enable a solution for
the direction cosines to be made for each of the three I’s.
To assist with the visualization of these conclusions, consider the
rectangular block, Fig. B/8, having an arbitrary orientation with respect
to the x-y-z axes. For simplicity, the mass center G is located at the origin of the coordinates. If the moments and products of inertia for the
block about the x-y-z axes are known, then solution of Eq. B/11 would
give the three roots, I1, I2, and I3, which are the principal moments of inertia. Solution of Eq. B/12 using each of the three I’s, in turn, along with
l2 ϩ m2 ϩ n2 ϭ 1, would give the direction cosines l, m, and n for each of
the respective principal axes, which are always mutually perpendicular.
From the proportions of the block as drawn, we see that I1 is the maximum moment of inertia, I2 is the intermediate value, and I3 is the minimum value.
z
1

3

y
2
2

G

x
3

1

Figure B/8
*See, for example, the ﬁrst author’s Dynamics, SI Version, 1975, John Wiley & Sons, Art. 41.

Article B/2

Products of Inertia

663

SAMPLE PROBLEM B/6
The bent plate has a uniform thickness t which is negligible compared with
its other dimensions. The density of the plate material is ␳. Determine the products of inertia of the plate with respect to the axes as chosen.

c

y

Solution.

z

Each of the two parts is analyzed separately.
a

Rectangular part.

b

In the separate view of this part, we introduce parallel

x

ᕡ axes x0-y0 through the mass center G and use the transfer-of-axis theorem. By
symmetry, we see that Ixy ϭ Ix0 y0 ϭ 0 so that

Helpful Hints

b
΂ a΃΂2΃ ϭ Ϫ 1 ␳ta b
2
4

[Ixy ϭ Ixy ϩ mdxdy]

Ixy ϭ 0 ϩ ␳tab Ϫ

ᕡ We must be careful to preserve the

2 2

Because the z-coordinate of all elements of the plate is zero, it follows that
Ixz ϭ Iyz ϭ 0.

same sense of the coordinates. Thus,
plus x0 and y0 must agree with plus
x and y.
y0
y

Triangular part.

In the separate view of this part, we locate the mass center
G and construct x0-, y0-, and z0-axes through G. Since the x0-coordinate of all elements is zero, it follows that Ixy ϭ Ix0 y0 ϭ 0 and Ixz ϭ Ix0 z0 ϭ 0. The transfer-ofaxis theorems then give us

x0

΂ ΃

[Ixy ϭ Ixy ϩ mdxdy]

b
2b
1
ϭ Ϫ ␳tab2c
Ixy ϭ 0 ϩ ␳t c(Ϫa)
2
3
3

[Ixz ϭ Ixz ϩ mdxdz]

c
b
1
Ixz ϭ 0 ϩ ␳t c(Ϫa)
ϭ Ϫ ␳tabc2
2
6
3

x
z0

΂΃

2c/3
y0

We obtain Iyz by direct integration, noting that the distance a of the plane of
the triangle from the y-z plane in no way affects the y- and z-coordinates. With
the mass element dm ϭ ␳t dy dz, we have

ᕢ

G

΄I ϭ ͵ yz dm΅
yz

͵ ͵ yz dz dy ϭ ␳t ͵ y΄z2 ΅
␳tc
ϭ
͵ y dy ϭ 1 ␳tb c
8
2b
b

Iyz ϭ ␳t

cy/b

0

2

0

0

2 cy/b

dy

c/3

G
b/3

2b/3

x0

z

y

a

0

b

3

2

b

dm

2 2

x

0

ᕢ We choose to integrate with respect

Adding the expressions for the two parts gives
1
Ixy ϭ Ϫ 1 ␳ta2b2 Ϫ 1 ␳tab2c ϭ Ϫ 12 ␳tab2(3a ϩ 4c)
4
3

Ans.

Ixz ϭ

0

Ϫ 1 ␳tabc2 ϭ Ϫ 1 ␳tabc2
6
6

Ans.

Iyz ϭ

0

ϩ1 ␳tb2c2 ϭ ϩ1 ␳tb2c2
8
8

Ans.

to z ﬁrst, where the upper limit is the
variable height z ϭ cy/b. If we were
to integrate ﬁrst with respect to y,
the limits of the ﬁrst integral would
be from the variable y ϭ bz/c to b.

664

Appendix B

Mass Moments of Inertia

SAMPLE PROBLEM B/7

z

50

The angle bracket is made from aluminum plate with a mass of 13.45 kg per
square meter. Calculate the principal moments of inertia about the origin O and
the direction cosines of the principal axes of inertia. The thickness of the plate is
small compared with the other dimensions.

160
50
70

50

x

y

Solution.

O

The masses of the three parts are

120

m1 ϭ 13.45(0.21)(0.1) ϭ 0.282 kg

ᕡ

110
Dimensions in millimeters

m2 ϭ Ϫ13.45␲(0.035)2 ϭ Ϫ0.0518 kg
Helpful Hints

m3 ϭ 13.45(0.12)(0.11) ϭ 0.1775 kg

ᕡ Note that the mass of the hole is
treated as a negative number.

Part 1

z

Ixx ϭ 1 mb2 ϭ 1 (0.282)(0.1)2 ϭ 9.42(10Ϫ4) kg ⅐ m2
3
3
1
2 ϩ b2) ϭ 1 (0.282)[(0.21)2 ϩ (0.1)2] ϭ 50.9(10Ϫ4) kg ⅐ m2
Iyy ϭ 3 m(a
3
1
2 ϭ 1 (0.282)(0.21)2 ϭ 41.5(10Ϫ4) kg ⅐ m2
Izz ϭ 3 ma
3

ᕢ

Ixy ϭ 0

a = 210

x

y

Iyz ϭ 0

O

Ixz ϭ Ixz ϩ mdx dz
ϭ0ϩm

b = 100

1

dx = 160

ab
ϭ 0.282(0.105)(0.05) ϭ 14.83(10Ϫ4) kg ⅐ m2
22

r = 35

z

2
dz = 50
x

y

Part 2
Ixx ϭ 1 mr2 ϩ mdz2 ϭ Ϫ0.0518
4

΄

(0.035)2
4

΅

ϩ (0.050)2

ϭ Ϫ1.453(10Ϫ4) kg ⅐ m2

΄(0.035)
2

2

΅

ϭ Ϫ14.86(10Ϫ4) kg ⅐ m2

΄(0.035)
4

2

΅

ϩ (0.16)2

ϭ Ϫ13.41(10Ϫ4) kg ⅐ m2
Ixy ϭ 0

c = 110

Also check Table D/4.

ϩ (0.16)2 ϩ (0.05)2

Izz ϭ 1 mr2 ϩ mdx2 ϭ Ϫ0.0518
4

3

ᕢ You can easily derive this formula.

Iyy ϭ 1 mr2 ϩ m(dx2 ϩ dz2)
2
ϭ Ϫ0.0518

O
d = 120

Iyz ϭ 0

Ixz ϭ Ixz ϩ mdxdz ϭ 0 Ϫ0.0518(0.16)(0.05) ϭ Ϫ4.14(10Ϫ4) kg ⅐ m2

Article B/2

SAMPLE PROBLEM B/7 (Continued)

Products of Inertia

665

z
a = 210
b = 100

1

Part 3
1

x

y

1

Ixx ϭ 3 md2 ϭ 3 (0.1775)(0.12)2 ϭ 8.52(10Ϫ4) kg ⅐ m2
O

Iyy ϭ 1 mc2 ϭ 1 (0.1775)(0.11)2 ϭ 7.16(10Ϫ4) kg ⅐ m2
3
3
1

dx = 160

1

Izz ϭ 3 m(c2 ϩ d2) ϭ 3 (0.1775)[(0.11)2 ϩ (0.12)2]
ϭ 15.68 (10Ϫ4) kg ⅐ m2

z

Ixy ϭ I xy ϩ mdx dy

Iyz ϭ 0

2
dz = 50
x

y

΂ ΃

c Ϫd
ϭ 0.1775(0.055)(Ϫ0.06) ϭ Ϫ5.86(10Ϫ4) kg ⅐ m2
2 2

ϭ0ϩm

r = 35

O

Ixz ϭ 0

3

d = 120

c = 110

z

3

Totals
Ixx ϭ 16.48(10Ϫ4) kg ⅐ m2
Iyy ϭ 43.2(10Ϫ4) kg ⅐ m2

Iyz ϭ 0

Izz ϭ 43.8(10Ϫ4) kg ⅐ m2

y

Ixy ϭ Ϫ5.86(10Ϫ4) kg ⅐ m2
Ixz ϭ 10.69(10Ϫ4) kg ⅐ m2

2
x
O

Substitution into Eq. B/11, expansion of the determinant, and simpliﬁcation
yield
I3 Ϫ 103.5(10Ϫ4)I2 ϩ 3180(10Ϫ8)I Ϫ 24 800(10Ϫ12) ϭ 0

ᕣ Solution of this cubic equation yields the following roots, which are the principal

1

moments of inertia

ᕣ A computer program for the solution

I1 ϭ 48.3(10Ϫ4) kg ⅐ m2
I2 ϭ 11.82(10Ϫ4) kg ⅐ m2

Ans.

I3 ϭ 43.4(10Ϫ4) kg ⅐ m2
The direction cosines of each principal axis are obtained by substituting
each root, in turn, into Eq. B/12 and using l2 ϩ m2 ϩ n2 ϭ 1. The results are
l1 ϭ 0.357

l2 ϭ 0.934

l3 ϭ 0.01830

m1 ϭ 0.410

m2 ϭ Ϫ0.1742

m3 ϭ 0.895

n1 ϭ Ϫ0.839

n2 ϭ 0.312

n3 ϭ 0.445

Ans.

The bottom ﬁgure shows a pictorial view of the bracket and the orientation of its
principal axes of inertia.

of a cubic equation may be used, or
an algebraic solution using the formula cited in item 4 of Art. C/4, Appendix C, may be employed.

666

Appendix B

Mass Moments of Inertia
B/59 Determine the products of inertia of the uniform
slender rod of mass m about the coordinate axes
shown.

PROBLEMS
Introductory Problems
B/57 Determine the products of inertia about the coordinate axes for the unit which consists of three small
spheres, each of mass m, connected by the light but
rigid slender rods.
z

z

m
h

m

l

a

l

l

b
y

x
l

m

Problem B/59

B/60 Determine the products of inertia about the coordinate axes for the thin plate of mass m which has the
shape of a circular sector of radius a and angle ␤ as
shown.

l

x

y

m

y
m

l

Problem B/57

β

B/58 Determine the products of inertia about the coordinate axes for the unit which consists of four small
particles, each of mass m, connected by the light but
rigid slender rods.
y
l
m

x
Problem B/60

B/61 Determine the products of inertia about the coordinate axes for the thin square plate with two circular
holes. The mass of the plate material per unit area is ␳.

l
l

a

z

l
l

y

l

b
–
4

m

b
–
4

b
–
4

b
–
4

m
l
z

l

b
–
8

x

m
Problem B/58

b
–
8

Problem B/61

b
–
4
b
–
4
b
–
4
b
–
4

x

Article B/2
B/62 The slender rod of mass m is formed into a quartercircular arc of radius r. Determine the products of
inertia of the rod with respect to the given axes.
z

Problems

667

B/65 The semicircular disk of mass m and radius R, inclined at an angle ␪ from the X-y plane, of Prob. B/56
is repeated here. By the methods of this article, determine the moment of inertia about the Z-axis.
x

X

y
r

R

z

Z

45°

y
Problem B/65
x

B/66 Determine the products of inertia for the rod of
Prob. B/46, repeated here.

Problem B/62

y

B/63 The uniform rectangular block weighs 50 lb. Calculate its products of inertia about the coordinate axes
shown.

z

x
z

6″

8″

y

b

O
b

4″
x
b

Problem B/63

b

B/64 Determine the product of inertia Ixy for the slender
rod of mass m.
y

l/2
θ

l/2

Problem B/64

x

Problem B/66

668

Appendix B

Mass Moments of Inertia

Representative Problems
B/67 The S-shaped piece is formed from a rod of diameter
d and bent into the two semicircular shapes. Determine the products of inertia for the rod, for which d
is small compared with r.

B/70 Determine the moment of inertia of the solid cube of
mass m about the diagonal axis A-A through opposite corners.
A

d

z

a

r

a

y

r

a

A

Problem B/70

x
Problem B/67

B/68 Determine the three products of inertia with respect
to the given axes for the uniform rectangular plate
of mass m.

B/71 The steel plate with two right-angle bends and a
central hole has a thickness of 15 mm. Calculate its
moment of inertia about the diagonal axis through
the corners A and B.

B

z

500

b
150

y

A

h
300

500

300

Dimensions in millimeters

θ

Problem B/71
x
Problem B/68

B/69 For the slender rod of mass m bent into the conﬁguration shown, determine its products of inertia Ixy,
Ixz, and Iyz.

B/72 Prove that the moment of inertia of the rigid assembly of three identical balls, each of mass m and radius r, has the same value for all axes through O.
Neglect the mass of the connecting rods.
z
m

z
y

b

45°
b
45°

b

b

m

y

b
O

x
b
Problem B/69

b
m

x

Problem B/72

Article B/2

*Computer-Oriented Problems
*B/73 Each sphere of mass m has a diameter which is
small compared with the dimension b. Neglect the
mass of the connecting struts and determine the
principal moments of inertia of the assembly with
respect to the coordinates shown. Determine also
the direction cosines of the axis of maximum moment of inertia.

Problems

669

*B/75 The assembly of three small spheres connected by
light rigid bars of Prob. B/57 is repeated here. Determine the principal moments of inertia and the
direction cosines associated with the axis of maximum moment of inertia.
z

m

l
l

l

z
m

l

m

b
l
b
m

b

x
b

O

y

m

y
l

b
m

Problem B/75

x

Problem B/73

*B/74 Determine the moment of inertia I about axis O-M
for the uniform slender rod bent into the shape
shown. Plot I versus ␪ from ␪ ϭ 0 to ␪ ϭ 90Њ and determine the minimum value of I and the angle ␣
which its axis makes with the x-direction. (Note:
Because the analysis does not involve the z-coordinate, the expressions developed for area moments
of inertia, Eqs. A/9, A/10, and A/11 in Appendix A of
Vol. 1 Statics, may be utilized for this problem in
place of the three-dimensional relations of Appendix B.) The rod has a mass ␳ per unit length.

*B/76 The bent rod of Probs. B/46 and B/66 is repeated
here. Its mass is m, and its diameter is small compared with its length. Determine the principal moments of inertia of the rod about the origin O. Also
ﬁnd the direction cosines for the axis of minimum
moment of inertia.
y
b

z

y
O

r

b
x

r

M
b

θ

x

O

b
Problem B/74
Problem B/76

670

Appendix B

Mass Moments of Inertia

*B/77 The thin plate has a mass ␳ per unit area and is
formed into the shape shown. Determine the principal moments of inertia of the plate about axes
through O.

z

*B/78 The slender rod has a mass ␳ per unit length and is
formed into the shape shown. Determine the principal moments of inertia about axes through O and
calculate the direction cosines of the axis of minimum moment of inertia.

2b

z
y
b

b

y
O
b

b
x

O
b
x

Problem B/77
Problem B/78

Selected Topics
of Mathematics

C/1

C

Introduction

Appendix C contains an abbreviated summary and reminder of selected topics in basic mathematics which ﬁnd frequent use in mechanics.
The relationships are cited without proof. The student of mechanics will
have frequent occasion to use many of these relations, and he or she will be
handicapped if they are not well in hand. Other topics not listed will also
be needed from time to time.
As the reader reviews and applies mathematics, he or she should
bear in mind that mechanics is an applied science descriptive of real
bodies and actual motions. Therefore, the geometric and physical interpretation of the applicable mathematics should be kept clearly in mind
during the development of theory and the formulation and solution of
problems.

C/2

Plane Geometry

1. When two intersecting lines are, respectively, perpendicular
to two other lines,
the angles formed by
the two pairs are equal.

4. Circle

θ1

Circumference ϭ 2␲r
Area ϭ ␲r2
Arc length s ϭ r␪

θ2

h

x hϪy
ϭ
b
h

x

y

s

Sector area ϭ 1r2␪
2

θ1 = θ2

2. Similar triangles

r
θ

5. Every triangle inscribed
within a semicircle is
a right triangle.

θ1

θ2

θ 1 + θ 2 = π /2

b

3. Any triangle

h

1
Area ϭ 2 bh
b

θ2

6. Angles of a triangle
␪1 ϩ ␪2 ϩ ␪3 ϭ 180Њ
␪4 ϭ ␪1 ϩ ␪2

θ1

θ3 θ4

671

672

Appendix C

C/3

Selected Topics of Mathematics

Solid Geometry

1. Sphere

3. Right-circular cone

Volume ϭ 4␲r3
3

1

Volume ϭ 3␲r2h

r

Surface area ϭ 4␲r2

L

Lateral area ϭ ␲rL
L ϭ Ίr2 ϩ h2

h

r

2. Spherical wedge
2
Volume ϭ 3r3␪

4. Any pyramid or cone

r
θ

1

Volume ϭ 3Bh

h

where B ϭ area of base
B

C/4

Algebra

1. Quadratic equation

4. Cubic equation

ax2

ϩ bx ϩ c ϭ 0

x3 ϭ Ax ϩ B

xϭ

Ϫb Ϯ Ίb2 Ϫ 4ac 2
, b Ն 4ac for real roots
2a

Let p ϭ A/3, q ϭ B/2.
Case I:

2. Logarithms
bx ϭ y, x ϭ log b y

q2 Ϫ p3 negative (three roots real and
distinct)
cos u ϭ q/(p Ίp), 0 Ͻ u Ͻ 180Њ

Natural logarithms

x1 ϭ 2Ίp cos (u/3)

b ϭ e ϭ 2.718 282
ex ϭ y, x ϭ log e y ϭ ln y

x2 ϭ 2Ίp cos (u/3 ϩ 120Њ)

log (ab) ϭ log a ϩ log b
log (a/b) ϭ log a Ϫ log b
log (1/n) ϭ Ϫlog n
log an ϭ n log a
log 1 ϭ 0
log10x ϭ 0.4343 ln x
3. Determinants
2nd order

x3 ϭ 2Ίp cos (u/3 ϩ 240Њ)
Case II:

q2 Ϫ p3 positive (one root real, two
roots imaginary)

x1 ϭ (q ϩ Ίq2 Ϫ p3)1/3 ϩ (q Ϫ Ίq2 Ϫ p3)1/3
Case III:

q2 Ϫ p3 ϭ 0 (three roots real, two
roots equal)
x1 ϭ 2q1/3, x2 ϭ x3 ϭ Ϫq1/3

For general cubic equation
3rd order

x3 ϩ ax2 ϩ bx ϩ c ϭ 0
Substitute x ϭ x0 Ϫ a/3 and get x03 ϭ Ax0 ϩ B.
Then proceed as above to ﬁnd values of x0 from
which x ϭ x0 Ϫ a/3.

Article C/6

C/5

Trigonometry

673

Analytic Geometry

1. Straight line

3. Parabola

y

y

y

y

a

a
m

b
b

1

a

x

b
x

x

a
x + – =1
y
–
a
b

y = a + mx

x
x2
y = b—
a2

2. Circle

y2
x = a—
b2

4. Ellipse
y

y

y

r

r

b

x

x

a
b

x2 + y2 = r2

x2 y2
—+— =1
a2 b2

x
a
2 + (y – b)2 = r2
(x – a)

5. Hyperbola
y

y

a

x

a

2

xy = a

C/6

Trigonometry

1. Deﬁnitions
sin ␪ ϭ a/c
cos ␪ ϭ b/c
tan ␪ ϭ a/b

csc ␪ ϭ c/a
sec ␪ ϭ c/b
cot ␪ ϭ b/a

c

a

θ
b

2. Signs in the four quadrants
(+)

II

I

θ

(+) (–)

(+)

θ
(–)
III

θ

θ
(–)

(+)
(–)

IV

b
a

x2 y2
— –— =1
a2 b2

x

674

Appendix C

Selected Topics of Mathematics

3. Miscellaneous relations

4. Law of sines

␪ϩ
␪ϭ1
1 ϩ tan2 ␪ ϭ sec2 ␪
1 ϩ cot2 ␪ ϭ csc2 ␪
sin2

cos2

a sin A
ϭ
b sin B

B
c

a

A

C

D

b

sin 2␪ ϭ 2 sin ␪ cos ␪
cos 2␪ ϭ cos2 ␪ Ϫ sin2 ␪
sin (a Ϯ b) ϭ sin a cos b Ϯ cos a sin b
cos (a Ϯ b) ϭ cos a cos b ϯ sin a sin b

C/7

5. Law of cosines
c2 ϭ a2 ϩ b2 Ϫ 2ab cos C
c2 ϭ a2 ϩ b2 ϩ 2ab cos D

Vector Operations

1. Notation. Vector quantities are printed in boldface type, and
scalar quantities appear in lightface italic type. Thus, the vector
quantity V has a scalar magnitude V. In longhand work vector
quantities should always be consistently indicated by a symbol such
l
as V or V to distinguish them from scalar quantities.

Q

P

R
Q

2. Addition
Triangle addition P ϩ Q ϭ R
Parallelogram addition P ϩ Q ϭ R
Commutative law P ϩ Q ϭ Q ϩ P
Associative law P ϩ (Q ϩ R) ϭ (P ϩ Q) ϩ R

P
R
Q

P
P

3. Subtraction
P Ϫ Q ϭ P ϩ (ϪQ)

4. Unit vectors

P–Q

i, j, k
z

V ϭ V xi ϩ V y j ϩ V z k
where

–Q

k

͉V͉ ϭ V ϭ ΊVx2 ϩ Vy2 ϩ Vz2
kVz

V
y

5. Direction cosines l, m, n are the cosines of the angles between V
and the x-, y-, z-axes. Thus,

j

jVy

l ϭ Vx /V
so that
and

m ϭ Vy /V
V ϭ V(li ϩ mj ϩ nk)
l2

ϩ

m2

ϩ

n2

ϭ1

n ϭ Vz /V
iVx

i
x

Article C/7

Vector Operations

675

6. Dot or scalar product
Q

P ⅐ Q ϭ PQ cos ␪

θ

This product may be viewed as the magnitude of P multiplied by
the component Q cos ␪ of Q in the direction of P, or as the magnitude of Q multiplied by the component P cos ␪ of P in the direction
of Q.
Commutative law

P⅐Q ϭ Q⅐P

P

Q

Q
Q cos θ

θ

P cos θ

θ

P

P

From the deﬁnition of the dot product
i⅐i ϭ j⅐j ϭ k⅐k ϭ 1
i⅐j ϭ j⅐i ϭ i⅐k ϭ k⅐i ϭ j⅐k ϭ k⅐j ϭ 0
P ⅐ Q ϭ (Px i ϩ Py j ϩ Pz k) ⅐ (Qx i ϩ Qy j ϩ Qz k)
ϭ PxQx ϩ PyQy ϩ PzQz
P ⅐ P ϭ Px 2 ϩ Py 2 ϩ P z 2
It follows from the deﬁnition of the dot product that two vectors P and Q are perpendicular when their dot product vanishes,
P ⅐ Q ϭ 0.
The angle ␪ between two vectors P1 and P2 may be found from
their dot product expression P1 ⅐ P2 ϭ P1P2 cos ␪, which gives
cos ␪ ϭ

P1 ⅐ P2 P1xP2x ϩ P1yP2y ϩ P1zP2z
ϭ
ϭ l1l2 ϩ m1m2 ϩ n1n2
P1P2
P1P2

where l, m, n stand for the respective direction cosines of the vectors. It is also observed that two vectors are perpendicular to each
other when their direction cosines obey the relation l1l2 ϩ m1m2 ϩ
n1n2 ϭ 0.
Distributive law

θ

P ⅐ (Q ϩ R) ϭ P ⅐ Q ϩ P ⅐ R

P
Q

7. Cross or vector product. The cross product P ؋ Q of the two
vectors P and Q is deﬁned as a vector with a magnitude

P×Q

͉P ؋ Q͉ ϭ PQ sin ␪

Q

and a direction speciﬁed by the right-hand rule as shown. Reversing
the vector order and using the right-hand rule give Q ؋ P ϭ
ϪP ؋ Q.
Distributive law

P ؋ (Q ϩ R) ϭ P ؋ Q ϩ P ؋ R

From the deﬁnition of the cross product, using a right-handed
coordinate system, we get
i؋jϭk
j ؋ i ϭ Ϫk

θ

j؋kϭi
k ؋ j ϭ Ϫi

k؋iϭj
i ؋ k ϭ Ϫj

i؋iϭj؋jϭk؋kϭ0

Q × P = –P × Q

P

676

Appendix C

Selected Topics of Mathematics

With the aid of these identities and the distributive law, the vector
product may be written
P ؋ Q ϭ (Px i ϩ Py j ϩ Pz k) ؋ (Qx i ϩ Qy j ϩ Qz k)
ϭ (PyQz Ϫ PzQy)i ϩ (PzQx Ϫ PxQz)j ϩ (PxQy Ϫ PyQx)k
The cross product may also be expressed by the determinant

8. Additional relations
Triple scalar product (P ؋ Q) ⅐ R ϭ R ⅐ (P ؋ Q). The dot and cross
may be interchanged as long as the order of the vectors is maintained. Parentheses are unnecessary since P ؋ (Q ⅐ R) is meaningless because a vector P cannot be crossed into a scalar Q ⅐ R. Thus,
the expression may be written
P ؋ Q⅐R ϭ P⅐Q ؋ R
The triple scalar product has the determinant expansion

Triple vector product (P ؋ Q) ؋ R ϭ ϪR ؋ (P ؋ Q) ϭ R ؋
(Q ؋ P). Here we note that the parentheses must be used since an
expression P ؋ Q ؋ R would be ambiguous because it would not
identify the vector to be crossed. It may be shown that the triple
vector product is equivalent to
(P ؋ Q) ؋ R ϭ R ⅐ PQ Ϫ R ⅐ QP
or

P ؋ (Q ؋ R) ϭ P ⅐ RQ Ϫ P ⅐ QR

The ﬁrst term in the ﬁrst expression, for example, is the dot product R ⅐ P, a scalar, multiplied by the vector Q.
9. Derivatives of vectors obey the same rules as they do for scalars.
dP
˙ ˙
˙
˙
ϭ P ϭ Px i ϩ Py j ϩ Pz k
dt
d(Pu)
ϭ Pu ϩ Pu
˙ ˙
dt
d(P ⅐ Q)
˙ ˙
ϭ P⅐Q ϩ P⅐Q
dt
d(P ؋ Q)
˙ ˙
ϭP؋QϩP؋Q
dt

Article C/9

10. Integration of vectors. If V is a function of x, y, and z and an element of volume is d␶ ϭ dx dy dz, the integral of V over the volume
may be written as the vector sum of the three integrals of its components. Thus,

͵ V d␶ ϭ i ͵ V d␶ ϩ j ͵ V d␶ ϩ k ͵ V d␶
x

C/8

y

z

Series

(Expression in brackets following series indicates range of
convergence.)
n(n Ϫ 1) 2 n(n Ϫ 1)(n Ϫ 2) 3
(1 Ϯ x)n ϭ 1 Ϯ nx ϩ
x Ϯ
x ϩ ⅐ ⅐ ⅐ [x2 Ͻ 1]
2!
3!
sin x ϭ x Ϫ

x 3 x 5 x7
ϩ Ϫ ϩ⅐ ⅐ ⅐
3! 5! 7!

[x2 Ͻ ȍ]

cos x ϭ 1 Ϫ

x 2 x4 x6
ϩ Ϫ ϩ⅐ ⅐ ⅐
2! 4! 6!

[x2 Ͻ ȍ]

sinh x ϭ

ex Ϫ eϪx
x 3 x5 x7
ϭ x ϩ ϩ ϩ ϩ⅐ ⅐ ⅐
2
3! 5! 7!

[x2 Ͻ ȍ]

cosh x ϭ

ex ϩ eϪx
x2 x4 x 6
ϭ 1 ϩ ϩ ϩ ϩ⅐ ⅐ ⅐
2
2! 4! 6!

[x2 Ͻ ȍ]

ƒ(x) ϭ

ȍ
ȍ
a0
n␲x
n␲x
ϩ ͚ an cos
ϩ ͚ bn sin
2
l
l
nϭ1
nϭ1

where an ϭ

1
l

͵

l

ƒ(x) cos

Ϫl

n␲x
dx,
l

bn ϭ

1
l

͵

l

ƒ(x) sin

Ϫl

n␲x
dx
l

[Fourier expansion for Ϫl Ͻ x Ͻ l]

C/9

Derivatives

΂΃

u
dv
du
d v
Ϫu
v
d(uv)
dx
dx
dv
du,
dxn
ϭ nxnϪ1,
ϭu
ϩv
ϭ
dx
dx
dx
dx dx
v2
lim sin ⌬x ϭ sin dx ϭ tan dx ϭ dx

⌬xl0

lim cos ⌬x ϭ cos dx ϭ 1

⌬xl0

d sin x
ϭ cos x,
dx
d sinh x
ϭ cosh x,
dx

d cos x
ϭ Ϫsin x,
dx
d cosh x
ϭ sinh x,
dx

d tan x
ϭ sec2 x
dx
d tanh x
ϭ sech2 x
dx

Derivatives

677

678

Appendix C

C/10

Selected Topics of Mathematics

Integrals

Article C/10

Integrals

679

680

Appendix C

Selected Topics of Mathematics

Article C/11

Newton’s Method for Solving Intractable Equations

C/11 Newton’s Method for Solving
Intractable Equations
Frequently, the application of the fundamental principles of mechanics leads to an algebraic or transcendental equation which is not
solvable (or easily solvable) in closed form. In such cases, an iterative
technique, such as Newton’s method, can be a powerful tool for obtaining a good estimate to the root or roots of the equation.
Let us place the equation to be solved in the form ƒ(x) ϭ 0. Part a of
the accompanying ﬁgure depicts an arbitrary function ƒ(x) for values of
x in the vicinity of the desired root xr. Note that xr is merely the value

ƒ(x)
ƒ(x)
ƒ(x)

ƒ(x)

Tangent to
ƒ(x) at x = x1

xr

x3

x2

x1

xr1

x

xr2
x1

(a)

x2

x

(b)

of x at which the function crosses the x-axis. Suppose that we have available (perhaps via a hand-drawn plot) a rough estimate x1 of this root.
Provided that x1 does not closely correspond to a maximum or minimum
value of the function ƒ(x), we may obtain a better estimate of the root xr
by extending the tangent to ƒ(x) at x1 so that it intersects the x-axis at
x2. From the geometry of the ﬁgure, we may write
ƒ(x1)
tan ␪ ϭ ƒЈ(x1) ϭ x Ϫ x
1
2
where ƒЈ(x1) denotes the derivative of ƒ(x) with respect to x evaluated at
x ϭ x1. Solving the above equation for x2 results in
x2 ϭ x 1 Ϫ

ƒ(x1)
ƒЈ(x1)

The term Ϫƒ(x1)/ƒЈ(x1) is the correction to the initial root estimate x1.
Once x2 is calculated, we may repeat the process to obtain x3, and so
forth.
Thus, we generalize the above equation to
xkϩ1 ϭ xk Ϫ

ƒ(xk)
ƒЈ(xk)

x2

xr

(c)

x1

x

681

682

Appendix C

Selected Topics of Mathematics

where
xkϩ1 ϭ the (k ϩ 1)th estimate of the desired root xr
xk ϭ the kth estimate of the desired root xr
ƒ(xk) ϭ the function ƒ(x) evaluated at x ϭ xk
ƒЈ(xk) ϭ the function derivative evaluated at x ϭ xk
This equation is repeatedly applied until ƒ(xkϩ1) is sufﬁciently close to
zero and xkϩ1 ഡ xk. The student should verify that the equation is valid
for all possible sign combinations of xk, ƒ(xk), and ƒЈ(xk).
Several cautionary notes are in order:

1. Clearly, ƒЈ(xk) must not be zero or close to zero. This would mean,
as restricted above, that xk exactly or approximately corresponds to
a minimum or maximum of ƒ(x). If the slope ƒЈ(xk) is zero, then the
tangent to the curve never intersects the x-axis. If the slope ƒЈ(xk) is
small, then the correction to xk may be so large that xkϩ1 is a worse
root estimate than xk. For this reason, experienced engineers usually limit the size of the correction term; that is, if the absolute
value of ƒ(xk)/ƒЈ(xk) is larger than a preselected maximum value,
that maximum value is used.
2. If there are several roots of the equation ƒ(x) ϭ 0, we must be in the
vicinity of the desired root xr in order that the algorithm actually
converges to that root. Part b of the ﬁgure depicts the condition
when the initial estimate x1 will result in convergence to xr2 rather
than xr1.
3. Oscillation from one side of the root to the other can occur if, for
example, the function is antisymmetric about a root which is an
inflection point. The use of one-half of the correction will usually
prevent this behavior, which is depicted in part c of the accompanying figure.
Example: Beginning with an initial estimate of x1 ϭ 5, estimate the single root of the equation ex Ϫ 10 cos x Ϫ 100 ϭ 0.
The table below summarizes the application of Newton’s method to
the given equation. The iterative process was terminated when the absolute value of the correction Ϫƒ(xk)/ƒЈ(xk) became less than 10Ϫ6.

k

xk

ƒ(xk)

ƒЈ(xk)

1
2
3
4
5

5.000 000
4.671 695
4.596 498
4.593 215
4.593 209

45.576 537
7.285 610
0.292 886
0.000 527
Ϫ2(10Ϫ8)

138.823 916
96.887 065
89.203 650
88.882 536
88.881 956

xkϩ1 Ϫ xk ϭ Ϫ

ƒ(xk)
ƒЈ(xk)

Ϫ0.328 305
Ϫ0.075 197
Ϫ0.003 283
Ϫ0.000 006
2.25(10Ϫ10)

Article C/12

Selected Techniques for Numerical Integration

C/12 Selected Techniques for
Numerical Integration
1. Area determination. Consider the problem of determining the
shaded area under the curve y ϭ ƒ(x) from x ϭ a to x ϭ b, as depicted in
part a of the ﬁgure, and suppose that analytical integration is not feasible. The function may be known in tabular form from experimental
measurements or it may be known in analytical form. The function is
taken to be continuous within the interval a Ͻ x Ͻ b. We may divide the
area into n vertical strips, each of width ⌬x ϭ (b Ϫ a)/n, and then add
the areas of all strips to obtain A ϭ ͐ y dx. A representative strip of area
Ai is shown with darker shading in the ﬁgure. Three useful numerical
approximations are cited. In each case the greater the number of strips,
the more accurate becomes the approximation geometrically. As a general rule, one can begin with a relatively small number of strips and
increase the number until the resulting changes in the area approximation no longer improve the accuracy obtained.
y

y = ƒ(x)

yn
yn – 1

Ai

yi + 1

yi
y1

y0
(a)

x0
=a

x1

y2
x2

y3

x

x3

xi

xi + 1

xn
=b

x

Rectangular
yi

(b)

Ai

yi + 1

Ai = ym x
ym A = y dx

ym x

x

I. Rectangular [Figure (b)] The areas of the strips are taken to be
rectangles, as shown by the representative strip whose height ym is chosen visually so that the small cross-hatched areas are as nearly equal as
possible. Thus, we form the sum Σym of the effective heights and multiply by ⌬x. For a function known in analytical form, a value for ym equal
to that of the function at the midpoint xi ϩ ⌬x/2 may be calculated and
used in the summation.
II. Trapezoidal [Figure (c)] The areas of the strips are taken to be
trapezoids, as shown by the representative strip. The area Ai is the average

683

684

Appendix C

Selected Topics of Mathematics

height (yi ϩ yi ϩ 1)/2 times ⌬x. Adding the areas gives the area approximation as tabulated. For the example with the curvature shown, clearly the
approximation will be on the low side. For the reverse curvature, the approximation will be on the high side.

yi

Ai

Trapezoidal
yi + yi + 1
Ai = –——––– Δ x
2
y0
yn
A = y dx — + y1 + y2 + … + yn – 1 + — Δ x
2
2
yi + 1

(

)

Δx

(c)

Parabolic
ΔA
yi + 1

yi

(d)

Δx

1
Δ A = –– ( yi + 4yi + 1 + yi + 2)Δ x
3
1
A = y dx ≅ –– ( y0 + 4y1 + 2y2 + 4y3 + 2y4
yi + 2
3
+ … + 2yn – 2 + 4yn – 1 + yn)Δ x

Δx

III. Parabolic [Figure (d)] The area between the chord and the
curve (neglected in the trapezoidal solution) may be accounted for by
approximating the function by a parabola passing through the points
deﬁned by three successive values of y. This area may be calculated from
the geometry of the parabola and added to the trapezoidal area of the
pair of strips to give the area ⌬A of the pair as cited. Adding all of the
⌬A’s produces the tabulation shown, which is known as Simpson’s rule.
To use Simpson’s rule, the number n of strips must be even.
Example: Determine the area under the curve y ϭ x Ί1 ϩ x2 from x ϭ 0
to x ϭ 2. (An integrable function is chosen here so that the three
approximations can be compared with the exact value, which is
2
2
A ϭ ͐0 x Ί1 ϩ x2 dx ϭ 1(1 ϩ x2)3/2͉ 0 ϭ 1(5Ί5 Ϫ 1) ϭ 3.393 447).
3
3
AREA APPROXIMATIONS
NUMBER OF
SUBINTERVALS

RECTANGULAR

TRAPEZOIDAL

PARABOLIC

4
10
50
100
1000
2500

3.361 704
3.388 399
3.393 245
3.393 396
3.393 446
3.393 447

3.456 731
3.403 536
3.393 850
3.393 547
3.393 448
3.393 447

3.392 214
3.393 420
3.393 447
3.393 447
3.393 447
3.393 447

Article C/12

Selected Techniques for Numerical Integration

Note that the worst approximation error is less than 2 percent, even
with only four strips.
2. Integration of ﬁrst-order ordinary differential equations.
The application of the fundamental principles of mechanics frequently
results in differential relationships. Let us consider the ﬁrst-order form
dy/dt ϭ ƒ(t), where the function ƒ(t) may not be readily integrable or
may be known only in tabular form. We may numerically integrate by
means of a simple slope-projection technique, known as Euler integration, which is illustrated in the ﬁgure.

dy
Slope –– = ƒ(t)
dt
y(t)

y(t)

Slope = ƒ(t3)

Accumulated
algorithmic
error

Slope = ƒ(t2)
Slope = ƒ(t1)

y4
y3

y1

t1

etc.

y2

t2

t3

t4

t

Beginning at t1, at which the value y1 is known, we project the slope
over a horizontal subinterval or step (t2 Ϫ t1) and see that y2 ϭ y1 ϩ
ƒ(t1)(t2 Ϫ t1). At t2, the process may be repeated beginning at y2, and so
forth until the desired value of t is reached. Hence, the general expression is
ykϩ1 ϭ yk ϩ ƒ(tk)(tkϩ1 Ϫ tk)
If y versus t were linear, i.e., if ƒ(t) were constant, the method would
be exact, and there would be no need for a numerical approach in that
case. Changes in the slope over the subinterval introduce error. For the
case shown in the ﬁgure, the estimate y2 is clearly less than the true
value of the function y(t) at t2. More accurate integration techniques
(such as Runge-Kutta methods) take into account changes in the slope
over the subinterval and thus provide better results.
As with the area-determination techniques, experience is helpful in
the selection of a subinterval or step size when dealing with analytical
functions. As a rough rule, one begins with a relatively large step size
and then steadily decreases the step size until the corresponding
changes in the integrated result are much smaller than the desired accuracy. A step size which is too small, however, can result in increased
error due to a very large number of computer operations. This type of
error is generally known as “round-off error,” while the error which results from a large step size is known as algorithm error.

685

686

Appendix C

Selected Topics of Mathematics

Example: For the differential equation dy/dt ϭ 5t with the initial condition y ϭ 2 when t ϭ 0, determine the value of y for t ϭ 4.
Application of the Euler integration technique yields the following
results:
NUMBER OF
SUBINTERVALS
10
100
500
1000

STEP SIZE

y at t ϭ 4

PERCENT ERROR

0.4
0.04
0.008
0.004

38
41.6
41.92
41.96

9.5
0.95
0.19
0.10

This simple example may be integrated analytically. The result is y ϭ 42
(exactly).

D

Useful Tables

TABLE D/1

PHYSICAL PROPERTIES

Density (kg/m3) and speciﬁc weight (lb/ft3)
kg/m3
Air*
Aluminum
Concrete (av.)
Copper
Earth (wet, av.)
(dry, av.)
Glass
Gold
Ice
Iron (cast)

lb/ft3

1.2062
2 690
2 400
8 910
1 760
1 280
2 590
19 300
900
7 210

0.07530
168
150
556
110
80
162
1205
56
450

kg/m3
Lead
Mercury
Oil (av.)
Steel
Titanium
Water (fresh)
(salt)
Wood (soft pine)
(hard oak)

lb/ft3

11 370
13 570
900
7 830
3 080
1 000
1 030
480
800

710
847
56
489
192
62.4
64
30
50

* At 20ЊC (68ЊF) and atmospheric pressure
Coefﬁcients of friction
(The coefﬁcients in the following table represent typical values under normal
working conditions. Actual coefﬁcients for a given situation will depend on the
exact nature of the contacting surfaces. A variation of 25 to 100 percent or more
from these values could be expected in an actual application, depending on prevailing conditions of cleanliness, surface ﬁnish, pressure, lubrication, and velocity.)

TYPICAL VALUES
OF COEFFICIENT
OF FRICTION
CONTACTING SURFACE

STATIC, ␮s

KINETIC, ␮k

Steel on steel (dry)
Steel on steel (greasy)
Teﬂon on steel
Steel on babbitt (dry)
Steel on babbitt (greasy)
Brass on steel (dry)
Brake lining on cast iron
Rubber tires on smooth pavement (dry)
Wire rope on iron pulley (dry)
Hemp rope on metal
Metal on ice

0.6
0.1
0.04
0.4
0.1
0.5
0.4
0.9
0.2
0.3

0.4
0.05
0.04
0.3
0.07
0.4
0.3
0.8
0.15
0.2
0.02

687

688

Appendix D

TABLE D/2

Useful Tables

SOLAR SYSTEM CONSTANTS
Universal gravitational constant
Mass of Earth
Period of Earth’s rotation (1 sidereal day)
Angular velocity of Earth
Mean angular velocity of Earth–Sun line
Mean velocity of Earth’s center about Sun

BODY
Sun

MEAN
DISTANCE
TO SUN
km (mi)

ECCENTRICITY
OF ORBIT
e

PERIOD
OF ORBIT
solar days

MEAN
DIAMETER
km (mi)

MASS
RELATIVE
TO EARTH

—

—

—

333 000

0.055

27.32

0.206

87.97

0.0068

224.70

0.0167

365.26

0.093

686.98

0.0489

4333

1 392 000
(865 000)
3 476
(2 160)
5 000
(3 100)
12 400
(7 700)
12 7422
(7 918)2
6 788
(4 218)
139 822
(86 884)

384 3981
(238 854)1
Mercury
57.3 ϫ 106
(35.6 ϫ 106)
108 ϫ 106
Venus
(67.2 ϫ 106)
149.6 ϫ 106
Earth
(92.96 ϫ 106)
227.9 ϫ 106
Mars
(141.6 ϫ 106)
Jupiter4
778 ϫ 106
(483 ϫ 106)
Moon

1
2

3
4

G ϭ 6.673(10Ϫ11) m3/(kg ⅐ s2)
ϭ 3.439(10Ϫ8) ft4/(lbf-s4)
me ϭ 5.976(1024) kg
ϭ 4.095(1023) lbf-s2/ft
ϭ 23 h 56 min 4 s
ϭ 23.9344 h
␻ ϭ 0.7292(10Ϫ4) rad/s
␻Ј ϭ 0.1991(10Ϫ6) rad/s
ϭ 107 200 km/h
ϭ 66,610 mi/h

0.0123
0.054
0.815
1.000
0.107
317.8

SURFACE
GRAVITATIONAL
ACCELERATION
m/s2 (ft/s2)

ESCAPE
VELOCITY
km/s (mi/s)

274
(898)
1.62
(5.32)
3.47
(11.4)
8.44
(27.7)
9.8213
(32.22)3
3.73
(12.3)
24.79
(81.3)

616
(383)
2.37
(1.47)
4.17
(2.59)
10.24
(6.36)
11.18
(6.95)
5.03
(3.13)
59.5
(36.8)

Mean distance to Earth (center-to-center)
Diameter of sphere of equal volume, based on a spheroidal Earth with a polar diameter of 12 714 km (7900 mi) and an
equatorial diameter of 12 756 km (7926 mi)
For nonrotating spherical Earth, equivalent to absolute value at sea level and latitude 37.5Њ
Note that Jupiter is not a solid body.

Useful Tables
TABLE D/3

PROPERTIES OF PLANE FIGURES
CENTROID

r
α –
α r

Arc Segment

—

– = ––
2r
y
␲

C

AREA MOMENTS
OF INERTIA

– = ––––––
r sin α
r
α

FIGURE

—

Quarter and Semicircular Arcs
C

C

–
y

r

y

r
Circular Area

—
x

C

4
Iz = ␲ r
–––
2

␲ r4
Ix = Iy = –––
8

y

Semicircular
Area

– = ––
4r
y
3␲

C
–
y

r

–
x C
–
y

– = – = ––
4r
x
y
3␲

–
–
␲
4
Ix = Iy = — – –– r4
16 9␲

(

)

4
Iz = ␲ r
–––
8

x

r4
Ix = –– (α – 1 sin 2α)
–
2
4

y

Area of Circular
Sector

)

(

␲ r4
Ix = Iy = –––
16

y

r

–
␲
8
Ix = – – –– r4
8
9␲
4
Iz = ␲ r
–––
4

x

Quarter-Circular
Area

␲ r4
Ix = Iy = –––
4

r
α –
α x

x
C

– = 2 ––––––
x – r sin α
α
3

r4
Iy = –– (α + 1 sin 2α )
–
2
4
Iz = 1 r4α
–
2

689

690

Appendix D

TABLE D/3

Useful Tables

PROPERTIES OF PLANE FIGURES

FIGURE

CENTROID

y0
C

h

—

x0
x

x1

a
–
x

C
–
y
b

y

Area of Elliptical
Quadrant

–
x

b

a+b
– = ––––
x
3

h
x

h
– = ––
y
3

– = 4a
x
––
3␲
– = 4b
y
––
3␲

C
–
y

x

a
Subparabolic Area
b
2
— 2
y y = kx = a2 x
Area A = ab
––
3

–
x

C b
–
y
a

– = 3a
x
––
4
– = 3b
y
––
10
x

Parabolic Area
y
a
Area A = 2ab
–––
3

b

–
x

b
y = kx2 = — x2
a2

C
–
y

– = 3a
x
––
8
– = 3b
y
––
5

x

–
bh3
Ix = –––
12
–
bh
Iz = –– (b2 + h2)
12

b

Triangular Area

AREA MOMENTS
OF INERTIA
bh3
Ix = –––
3

Rectangular Area

y

Continued

bh3
Ix = –––
12
–
bh3
Ix = –––
36
bh3
Ix1 = –––
4

␲
4
ab3 –
Ix = ␲
––––, Ix = –– – –– ab3
16 9␲
16

(
(

)
)

3
–
␲
4
Iy = ␲ a b Iy = –– – –– a3b
––––,
16
16 9␲

␲ ab
Iz = ––– (a2 + b2)
16

ab3
Ix = –––
21
a3b
Iy = –––
5
a3 b2
Iz = ab –– + ––
5 21

(

)

2ab3
Ix = ––––
7
2a3b
Iy = ––––
15
a2 b2
Iz = 2ab –– + ––
15 7

(

)

Useful Tables
TABLE D/4 PROPERTIES OF HOMOGENEOUS SOLIDS
(m ϭ mass of body shown)

MASS
CENTER

BODY
l
–
2

l
–
2

1
Ixx ϭ 1 mr2 ϩ 12 ml2
2

r
G

z

y

Circular
Cylindrical
Shell

—

Ix1x1 ϭ 1 mr2 ϩ 1 ml2
2
3
Izz ϭ mr2

x

x1

MASS MOMENTS
OF INERTIA

Ixx ϭ Iyy
1
ϭ 1 mr2 ϩ 12 ml2
2

l
–
2

l
–
2

G

z r

y

y1

Half
Cylindrical
Shell

Ix1x1 ϭ Iy1 y1
2r
xϭ ␲

ϭ 1 mr2 ϩ 1 ml2
2
3
Izz ϭ mr2

x

x1

΂

–

Izz ϭ 1 Ϫ
l
–
2

l
–
2

1
Ixx ϭ 1 mr2 ϩ 12 ml2
4

r

Circular
Cylinder

G

z

—

Ix1x1 ϭ 1 mr2 ϩ 1 ml2
4
3
Izz ϭ 1 mr2
2

x

x1

΃

4
mr2
␲2

Ixx ϭ Iyy
1
ϭ 1 mr2 ϩ 12 ml2
4

l
–
2

l
–
2

Ix1x1 ϭ Iy1y1

G

z r

Semicylinder
y

y1

4r
xϭ
3␲

ϭ 1 mr2 ϩ 1 ml2
4
3
Izz ϭ 1 mr2
2

x

x1

–

Izz ϭ

1
1

Iyy ϭ 12 m(b2 ϩ l2)
Rectangular
Parallelepiped

b
G

z
a

2

2

Ixx ϭ 12 m(a2 ϩ l2)

l
–
2

l
–
2

16
΂1 Ϫ 9␲ ΃ mr
2

y

y1

y2

x

—

1
Izz ϭ 12 m(a2 ϩ b2)
1
Iy1 y1 ϭ 12 mb2 ϩ 1 ml2
3

Iy2 y2 ϭ 1 m(b2 ϩ l2)
3

691

692

Appendix D

Useful Tables

TABLE D/4 PROPERTIES OF HOMOGENEOUS SOLIDS
(m ϭ mass of body shown)

MASS
CENTER

MASS MOMENTS
OF INERTIA

Spherical
Shell

—

Izz ϭ 2mr2
3

Hemispherical
Shell

r
xϭ
2

Sphere

—

Hemisphere

3r
xϭ
8

BODY

G
z

r

r
G

z

Continued

y

Ixx ϭ Iyy ϭ Izz ϭ 2mr2
3
–

–

5

Iyy ϭ Izz ϭ 12mr2

x

G
z

Izz ϭ 2mr2
5

r

r
G

z

y

Ixx ϭ Iyy ϭ Izz ϭ 2mr2
5
–

–

83

Iyy ϭ Izz ϭ 320mr2

x

l
–
2

l
–
2

Uniform
Slender Rod

G
y1

y

—

1
Iyy ϭ 12 ml2
1

Iy1 y1 ϭ 3 ml2

Useful Tables
TABLE D/4 PROPERTIES OF HOMOGENEOUS SOLIDS
(m ϭ mass of body shown)

MASS
CENTER

BODY

Continued

MASS MOMENTS
OF INERTIA

x
_
y

QuarterCircular Rod

_ G
x
r
y

xϭy
2r
ϭ ␲

Ixx ϭ Iyy ϭ 1mr2
2
Izz ϭ mr2

z
l
–
2

l
–
2

1
Ixx ϭ 1ma2 ϩ 12ml2
4

b

Elliptical
Cylinder

G

z

—

Izz ϭ 1m(a2 ϩ b2)
4

a

Iy1y1 ϭ 1mb2 ϩ 1ml2
4
3

y

y1

1
Iyy ϭ 1mb2 ϩ 12ml2
4

x

Iyy ϭ 1mr2 ϩ 1mh2
2
4

r
G
z
y

h

Conical
Shell

2h
zϭ
3

Iy1y1 ϭ 1mr2 ϩ 1mh2
4
6
1

Izz ϭ 2mr2
–

y1

1
Iyy ϭ 1mr2 ϩ 18mh2
4

Ixx ϭ Iyy
ϭ 1 mr2 ϩ 1 mh2
2
4
xϭ
z

G
x1

y

h

r

y1

Half
Conical
Shell

Ix1x1 ϭ Iy1y1
ϭ 1 mr2 ϩ 1 mh2
4
6

zϭ

x

4r
3␲

2h
3

1

Izz ϭ 2 mr2
–

Izz ϭ

16
΂1 Ϫ 9␲ ΃ mr
2

2

2

3

3

Iyy ϭ 20 mr2 ϩ 5 mh2

r
G
z
h
y1

y

RightCircular
Cone

3

3h
zϭ
4

1
Iy1y1 ϭ 20 mr2 ϩ 10 mh2
3

Izz ϭ 10 mr2
–

3

3

Iyy ϭ 20 mr2 ϩ 80 mh2

693

694

Appendix D

Useful Tables

TABLE D/4 PROPERTIES OF HOMOGENEOUS SOLIDS
(m ϭ mass of body shown)

MASS
CENTER

BODY

Continued

MASS MOMENTS
OF INERTIA
Ixx ϭ Iyy
3

3

ϭ 20 mr2 ϩ 5 mh2
z

G
x1

Half Cone
y

h

r

y1

r
xϭ␲
3h
zϭ
4

x

Ix1x1 ϭ Iy1y1
3
3

Izz ϭ 10 mr2
–

Izz ϭ

3
΂10 Ϫ ␲1 ΃ mr

2

2

1

x2 y2 z2
— + — + — =1
a2 b2 c2

x

1

ϭ 20 mr2 ϩ 10 mh2

Ixx ϭ 5m(b2 ϩ c2)
1

Iyy ϭ 5m(a2 ϩ c2)
a

z

G

zϭ

3c
8

1

Izz ϭ 5m(a2 ϩ b2)
–

b
c

–

19

Iyy ϭ 1m(a2 ϩ 64c2)
5

Semiellipsoid

y

Ixx ϭ 1mb2 ϩ 1mc2
2
6

x2 y2
z
—+— = –
a2 b2
c
b

19

1

Ixx ϭ 5m(b2 ϩ 64c2)

1

y

1

Iyy ϭ 6ma2 ϩ 2mc2
Elliptic
Paraboloid

G

z

zϭ

2c
3

1

Izz ϭ 6m(a2 ϩ b2)
–

Ixx ϭ 1m(b2 ϩ 1c2)
6
3

a
c

–

x

Iyy ϭ 1m(a2 ϩ 1c2)
6
3
1

Ixx ϭ 10m(b2 ϩ c2)

z

a
4
b
yϭ
4
c
zϭ
4

xϭ
c
G

x

Rectangular
Tetrahedron

1
Iyy ϭ 10m(a2 ϩ c2)
1
Izz ϭ 10m(a2 ϩ b2)

b
y

–

3

–

3

–

a

3

Ixx ϭ 80m(b2 ϩ c2)
Iyy ϭ 80m(a2 ϩ c2)
Izz ϭ 80m(a2 ϩ b2)

z
x

Half Torus

G
y

a
R

R

a2 ϩ 4R2
xϭ
2␲R

5

Ixx ϭ Iyy ϭ 1mR2 ϩ 8ma2
2
3

Izz ϭ mR2 ϩ 4ma2

Index

Absolute measurements, 5, 119
Absolute motion, 22, 88, 338, 349, 372
Absolute system of units, 7, 120
Acceleration:
absolute, 89, 119, 372, 388
angular, 328, 330, 517
average, 23, 41
constant, 25, 328
Coriolis, 119, 388
cylindrical components of, 79
function of displacement, 26
function of time, 25
function of velocity, 26
graphical determination of, 24
due to gravity, 9, 10, 120
instantaneous, 23, 42
normal components of, 55
polar components of, 67
rectangular components of, 43, 79
relative to rotating axes, 387, 528
relative to translating axes, 89, 244,
372, 527
spherical components of, 80
tangential component of, 55
vector representation of, 42
from work-energy principle, 477
Acceleration-displacement diagram, 24
Acceleration-time diagram, 24
Accelerometer, 606
Action and reaction, principle of, 6
Active-force diagram, 160, 412, 461
Addition of vectors, 5, 674
Amplitude ratio, 602, 603
Amplitude of vibration, 586
Angular acceleration, 328, 330, 517
Angular displacement, 327
Angular impulse, 206, 487

Angular momentum:
applied to ﬂuid streams, 290
conservation of, 208, 230, 276, 489
of a particle, 205, 246
relative, 246, 274
of a rigid body, 413, 487, 539
of a system, 272
units of, 205
vector representation of, 205
Angular motion:
of a line, 327
vector representation of, 329, 514
Angular velocity, 327, 328, 514, 517
absolute, 542, 372
of the earth, 119, 688
vector representation of, 329, 516, 517
Apogee velocity, 234
Area moments of inertia, 639
Associative law, 674
Astronomical frame of reference, 4, 118, 244
Axes:
rotating, 385, 528
translating, 88, 244, 348, 527
Balancing in rotation, 552
Base units, 7, 120
Bodies, interconnected, 270, 418, 477, 488
Body, rigid, 5, 267, 326, 411, 514
Body centrode, 363
Body cone, 517, 565
Cajori, F., 4
Center:
of curvature, 55
of mass, motion of, 269
of percussion, 431
Central-force motion, 230

695

696

Index

Centrifugal force, 245
Centrode, body and space, 363
Centroids, table of, 689
Circular frequency, natural, 586
Circular motion, 56, 68
Coefﬁcient:
of friction, 687
of restitution, 218, 490
of viscous damping, 587
Commutative law, 674, 675
Complementary solution, 601
Computer-oriented problems, 14, 112, 262, 407, 509, 636, 669
Cone, body and space, 517, 565
Conservation:
of energy, 178, 275, 625
of momentum, 193, 208, 218, 230, 276, 489, 564
Conservative force, 178
Conservative system, 275, 462, 625
Constant of gravitation, 8, 688
Constrained motion, 22, 98, 123, 417, 444
Constraint, equations of, 98, 478
Coordinates:
cartesian, 22
choice of, 22, 43, 88, 106, 122, 123, 642
cylindrical, 79
normal and tangential, 54
polar, 66
rectangular, 43, 79
rotating, 385, 528
spherical, 80
transformation of, 81, 107
translating, 88, 244, 348, 527
Coriolis, G., 4, 388
Coriolis acceleration, 119, 388
Couple:
gyroscopic, 560
resultant, 477, 551
work of, 459
Critical frequency, 602
Cross or vector product, 205, 329, 385, 675
Curvature:
center of, 55
radius of, 54, 680
Curvilinear motion:
in cylindrical coordinates, 79
in normal and tangential coordinates, 54, 138
of a particle, 40, 79, 138
in polar coordinates, 66, 138
in rectangular coordinates, 43, 79, 138
in spherical coordinates, 80
Curvilinear translation, 326, 421, 514
D’Alembert, J., 4, 245
D’Alembert’s principle, 244
Damped forced vibration, 602
Damped free vibration, 587
Damping:
coefﬁcient, 587
critical, 588
ratio, 588
viscous or ﬂuid, 587

Dashpot, 587
Degrees of freedom, 98, 123, 584
Densities, table of, 687
Derivative:
table of, 677
transformation of, 387, 529
of a vector, 41, 676
Descartes, R., 22
Diagram:
acceleration-displacement, 24
acceleration-time, 24
active-force, 160, 412, 461
displacement-time, 24
force-displacement, 155, 157
force-time, 193
free-body, 14, 123, 413, 461, 584
impulse-momentum, 192, 487
kinetic, 413, 414, 415, 416, 421, 431, 443
velocity-displacement, 24
velocity-time, 24
Dimensions, homogeneity of, 11
Direction cosines, 674
Discrete or lumped-parameter model, 583
Displacement:
angular, 327
in curvilinear motion, 40
graphical determination of, 24
linear, 22
virtual, 478
Displacement meter, 606
Displacement-time diagram, 24
Distance, 40
Distributed-parameter system, 583
Distributive law, 675
Dot or scalar product, 154, 155, 159, 675
Dynamical energy, conservation of, 178, 275
Dynamic balance in rotation, 552
Dynamic equilibrium, 245
Dynamics, 3
Earth, angular velocity of, 119, 688
Earth satellites, equations of motion for, 230
Efﬁciency, 161
Einstein, A., 4, 120
Elastic impact, 219
Elastic potential energy, 176, 461
Electric circuit analogy, 606
Energy:
conservation of, 178, 275, 625
kinetic, 159, 269, 460, 542
potential, 175, 461, 624
in satellite motion, 233
in vibration, 624
Equations of constraint, 98, 478
Equations of motion:
for ﬁxed-axis rotation, 431
for particles, 125, 138
for plane motion, 414, 443
in polar coordinates, 138
for rectilinear and curvilinear translation, 421
for a rigid body, 413, 550

Index
for rotation about a point, 515
for a system of particles, 269
Equilibrium, dynamic, 245
Euler, L., 4, 551
Euler’s equations, 551
Fluid damping, 587
Fluid streams, momentum equations for, 289, 290
Foot, 7
Force:
centrifugal, 245
concept of, 5
conservative, 178
external, 269
inertia, 245
internal, 268
gravitational, 8, 11, 121
resultant, 6, 124, 159, 191, 269, 413, 477, 551
units of, 7
work of, 154, 459
Force-displacement diagram, 155, 157
Forced vibration, 600, 614
damped, 602
equation for, 601
frequency ratio for, 602
magniﬁcation factor for, 602, 603
resonant frequency of, 602
steady-state, 602, 603
undamped, 601
Force ﬁeld, conservative, 178
Force-time diagram, 193
Forcing functions, 600
Formulation of problems, 12
Frame of reference, 6, 88, 244, 246, 385, 527, 528
Free-body diagram, 14, 123, 413, 461, 584
Freedom, degrees of, 98, 123, 584
Free vibration:
damped, 587
energy solution for, 624
equations for, 584, 587
undamped, 584
vector representation of, 586
Frequency:
critical, 602
damped, 590
natural and circular, 586
Frequency ratio, 602
Friction:
coefﬁcients of, 687
work of, 462
Galileo, 3
Gradient, 179
Graphical representation, 14, 24, 155, 328, 350,
373, 586
Gravitation:
constant of, 8, 688
law of, 8
Gravitational force, 8, 11, 121
Gravitational potential energy, 175, 461
Gravitational system of units, 7, 120

Gravity:
acceleration due to, 9, 10, 120
International Formula for, 10
Gyration, radius of, 643
Gyroscope, 558
Gyroscopic couple, 560
Gyroscopic motion, equation of, 559
Harmonic motion, simple, 29, 585
Hertz (unit), 586
Hodograph, 42
Horsepower, 161
Huygens, C., 3
Imbalance, rotational, 552
Impact, 217, 490
classical theory of, 219
direct central, 217
elastic, 219
energy loss in, 219
inelastic or plastic, 219
oblique, 219
Impulse:
angular, 206, 487
linear, 192, 486
Impulse-momentum diagram, 192, 487
Impulse-momentum equation, 192, 206, 246
Inertia, 5, 118
area moments of, see Moments of inertia of area
mass moments of, see Moments of inertia of mass
principal axes of, 541, 661
products of, 540, 660
Inertia force, 245
Inertial system, 4, 88, 89, 118, 119
Inertia tensor or matrix, 541, 661
Instantaneous axis of rotation, 362, 516
Instantaneous center of zero velocity, 362
Integrals, table of selected, 678
Integration, numerical techniques for, 683, 685
of vectors, 677
Interconnected bodies, 270, 418, 477, 488
International Gravity Formula, 10
International System of units, 6
Joule (unit), 155
Kepler, J., 230
Kepler’s laws of motion, 230, 232
Kilogram, 7, 120
Kinematics, 3, 21, 325, 514
of angular motion, 328, 514
of curvilinear motion, 40
of rectilinear motion, 22
of relative motion, 22, 88, 244, 348, 372, 385, 527
of rigid bodies, 325, 514
Kinetic diagram, 413, 414, 415, 416, 421, 431, 443
Kinetic energy:
of a particle, 159
of plane motion, 460
of rotation, 460, 542
of space motion, 543

697

698

Index

Kinetic energy: (continued)
of a system of particles, 270, 542
of translation, 460
units of, 159
Kinetic friction, coefﬁcient of, 687
Kinetics, 3, 21, 117, 267, 411, 539
of particles, 117
of rigid bodies, in plane motion, 411, 552
in rotation, 431, 539
in space motion, 539
Kinetic system of units, 120
Lagrange, J. L., 4
Lagrange’s equations, 419
Laplace, P., 4
Law:
associative, 674
commutative, 674, 675
of conservation of dynamical energy, 178, 275, 625
distributive, 675
of gravitation, 8
Laws of motion:
Kepler’s, 230, 232
Newton’s, 6, 117, 244, 268, 486
Light, speed of, 4, 120
Line, angular motion of, 327
Linear displacement, 22
Linear impulse, 192, 486
Linear momentum:
applied to ﬂuid streams, 289
conservation of, 193, 218, 276, 489
moment of, 205
of a particle, 191
relative, 246
of a rigid body, 486
of a system, 271
Logarithmic decrement, 590
Lumped-parameter or discrete model, 583
Magniﬁcation factor, 602, 603
Mass, 5, 117
steady ﬂow of, 288
unit of, 7, 120
variable, 303
Mass center, motion of, 269
Mass ﬂow, equations of motion for, 289, 290
Mass moments of inertia, see Moments of inertia of mass
Mathematical model, 12
Mathematics, selected topics in, 671
Matrix, inertia, 541, 661
Measurements:
absolute, 5, 119
relative, 88, 244, 246, 348, 372, 385, 527
Mechanics, 3
Meter, 7
Metric units, 6, 120
Moment center, choice of, 416, 421, 443
Moment equation of motion, 206, 272, 273, 274, 275, 414, 416,
417, 550
Moment of linear momentum, 205
Moments of inertia of area, 639, 644, 689

Moments of inertia of mass, 414, 539, 641
choice of element of integration for, 642
for composite bodies, 645
about any prescribed axis, 661
principal axes for, 541, 661
radius of gyration for, 643
table of, 691
transfer of axes for, 643
Momentum:
angular, 205, 246, 272, 290, 487, 539
conservation of, 193, 208, 218, 230, 276, 489, 564
equations for mass ﬂow, 289, 290
linear, 191, 271, 486
moment of, 205
rate of change of, 6, 191, 206, 271, 272, 273, 274, 275, 486,
487, 488, 550
vector representation of, 191, 205, 486, 487, 542
Motion:
absolute, 22, 88, 338, 349, 372
angular, 327, 329, 514, 515, 517, 518
central-force, 230
circular, 56, 68
constrained, 22, 98, 123, 417, 444
curvilinear, 40, 79, 138
in cylindrical coordinates, 79
general space, 527
graphical representation of, 14, 24, 155, 328, 350, 373, 586
gyroscopic, 558
of mass center, 269
Newton’s laws of, 6, 117, 244, 268, 486
in normal and tangential coordinates, 54
parallel-plane, 515, 552
plane, 22, 40, 326, 411, 443
planetary and satellite, 230
in polar coordinates, 66
in rectangular coordinates, 43, 79
rectilinear, 22, 124
relative, 22, 88, 244, 348, 372, 385, 527
rotational, 327, 431, 514, 515
simple harmonic, 29, 585
in spherical coordinates, 80
of a system of particles, 267
unconstrained, 22, 123, 444
Natural frequency, 586
Newton, Isaac, 3, 4
Newton (unit), 7
Newtonian frame of reference, 246, 268, 272
Newtonian mechanics, 120, 268
Newton’s laws, 6, 117, 244, 268, 486
Newton’s method, 681
Notation for vectors, 5, 41, 674
Numerical integration, 683, 685
Nutation, 561
Oblique central impact, 219
Orbit, elliptical, 232
Osculating plane, 22
Parallel-axis theorems, for mass moments of inertia, 643
Parallel-plane motion, 515, 552

Index
Particles, 5, 21
curvilinear motion of, 40, 79, 138
equations of motion of, 125, 138
kinematics of, 21
kinetics of, 117
motion of system of, 267
Particle vibration, 584
Particular solution, 601, 603
Path variables, 22, 55
Percussion, center of, 431
Perigee velocity, 234
Period:
of orbital motion, 232, 235
of vibration, 586, 590
Phase angle, 603
Plane motion, 22, 40, 326, 411, 443
curvilinear, 40
equations of motion for, 414, 443
general, 326, 443
kinematics of, 40, 88, 326
kinetic energy of, 460
kinetics of, 411, 552
Planetary motion:
Kepler’s laws of, 230, 232
period of, 232
Poinsot, L., 4
Polar moment of inertia, 644
Position vector, 41
Potential energy, 175, 461, 624
Potential function, 178
Pound force, 7, 120, 122
Pound mass, 8, 121, 122
Power, 160, 462
Precession:
deﬁned, 517, 558
direct and retrograde, 565
steady, 558, 560, 563
velocity of, 558
with zero moment, 564
Primary inertial system, 4, 88, 118
Principal axes of inertia, 541, 661
Principia, 4
Principle:
of action and reaction, 6
of conservation of momentum, 193, 208, 218, 230, 276, 489,
564
D’Alembert’s, 245
of motion of mass center, 269
Products of inertia, 540, 660
Products of vectors, 154, 205, 675
Projectile motion, 44
Propulsion, rocket, 305
Radius:
of curvature, 54, 680
of gyration, 643
Rectilinear motion of a particle, 22, 124
Rectilinear translation, 326, 420, 514
Reference frame, 6, 88, 244, 246, 385, 527, 528
Relative acceleration, rotating axes, 387, 528
translating axes, 89, 244, 372, 527

699

Relative angular momentum, 246, 274
Relative linear momentum, 246
Relative motion, 22, 88, 244, 348, 372, 385, 527
Relative velocity:
rotating axes, 386, 528
translating axes, 89, 348, 527
Relativity, theory of, 120
Resonance, 602
Restitution, coefﬁcient of, 218, 490
Resultant:
couple, 477, 551
force, 6, 124, 159, 191, 269, 413, 477, 551
Right-hand rule, 205, 675
Rigid bodies:
kinematics of, 325, 514
kinetics of, 411, 552
Rigid body, 5, 267, 326, 411, 514
Rigid-body motion, general moment equations for, 413, 416, 417
Rigid-body vibration, 614
Rocket propulsion, 305
Rotating axes, 385, 528
Rotation:
equations of motion for, 417, 431
ﬁnite, 515
ﬁxed-axis, 326, 329, 431, 514
ﬁxed-point, 515
inﬁnitesimal, 516
instantaneous axis of, 362, 516
kinematics of, 327, 329, 517
kinetic energy of, 460, 542
of a line, 327
of a rigid body, 326, 431, 514, 515
Rotational imbalance, 552
Satellite, motion of, 230
Scalar, 5
Scalar or dot product, 154, 155, 159, 675
Second, 7
Series, selected expansions, 677
Simple harmonic motion, 29, 585
SI units, 6, 7
Slug, 7, 120, 121
Solar system constants, 688
Solution, method of, 12
Space, 4
Space centrode, 363
Space cone, 517, 565
Space motion, general, 527
Speed, 41
Spin axis, 558
Spin velocity, 558
Spring:
constant or stiffness of, 156, 584, 625
potential energy of, 176
work done by, 156
Standard conditions, 10, 120
Static friction, coefﬁcient of, 687
Steady mass ﬂow, force and moment equations for, 289,
290
Steady-state vibration, 602, 603
Subtraction of vectors, 674

700

Index

System:
conservative, 275, 462, 625
of interconnected bodies, 270, 418, 477, 488
of particles:
angular momentum of, 272
equation of motion for, 269
kinetic energy of, 270, 542
linear momentum of, 271
of units, 6, 8, 120
Table:
of area moments of inertia, 689
of centroids, 689
of coefﬁcients of friction, 687
of densities, 687
of derivatives, 677
of integrals, 678
of mass centers, 691
of mass moments of inertia, 691
of mathematical relations, 671
of solar-system constants, 688
of units, 7
Tensor, inertia, 541, 661
Theory of relativity, 120
Thrust, rocket, 305
Time, 5, 7, 120
Time derivative, transformation of, 387, 529
Transfer of axes:
for moments of inertia, 643
for products of inertia, 660
Transformation of derivative, 387, 529
Transient solution, 602, 603
Translating axes, 88, 244, 348, 527
Translation, rectilinear and curvilinear, 326, 420, 514
Triple scalar product, 543, 676
Triple vector product, 676
Two-body problem:
perturbed, 235
restricted, 235
Unconstrained motion, 22, 123, 444
Units, 6, 8, 120
kinetic system of, 120
Unit vectors, 43, 54, 66
derivative of, 54, 66, 385, 528
U.S. customary units, 6, 8, 120
Variable mass, force equation of, 304
Vectors, 5, 674
addition of, 5, 674
cross or vector product of, 205, 329, 385, 675
derivative of, 41, 676
dot or scalar product of, 154, 155, 159, 675
integration of, 677
notation for, 5, 41, 674

subtraction of, 674
triple scalar product of, 676
triple vector product of, 676
unit, 43, 54, 66, 79, 674
Velocity:
absolute, 88
angular, 327, 328, 514, 517
average, 23, 40
cylindrical components of, 80
deﬁned, 23, 41
graphical determination of, 24
instantaneous, 23, 41
instantaneous axis or center of, 362
in planetary motion, 234
polar components of, 66
rectangular components of, 43, 79
relative to rotating axes, 386, 527
relative to translating axes, 89, 348
spherical components of, 80
tangential component of, 54
vector representation of, 41
Velocity-displacement diagram, 24
Velocity-time diagram, 24
Vibration:
amplitude of, 586
damped, 587
energy in, 624
forced, 600, 614
free, 584
frequency of, 586, 589
over- and underdamped, 588, 589
period of, 586, 590
reduction of, 603
simple harmonic, 585
steady-state, 602, 603
transient, 602, 603
work-energy solution for, 624
Virtual displacement, 478
Virtual work, 154, 478
Viscous damping coefﬁcient, 587
Watt, 161
Weight, 7, 8, 11, 121
Work, 154, 459
of a constant force, 156
of a couple, 459
an exact differential, 178
examples of, 155
of a force, 154, 459
of friction, 462
graphical representation of, 155
of a spring force, 156
units of, 155
virtual, 154, 478
of weight, 157
Work-energy equation, 160, 177, 246, 270, 461, 552

Problem Answers

(When a problem asks for both a general and a speciﬁc result, only the speciﬁc result might be listed below.)

Chapter 1
1/1
1/2
1/3
1/4
1/5
1/6
1/7

180-lb person: m ϭ 5.59 slugs ϭ 81.6 kg
W ϭ 801 N
W ϭ 14 720 N ϭ 3310 lb, m ϭ 102.8 slugs
m ϭ 0.01294 slugs ϭ 0.1888 kg, W ϭ 1.853 N
27, 1.392i ϩ 18j, 19.39i Ϫ 6j, 178.7k, Ϫ21.5
(a) Ϫ1.255(10Ϫ10)i N
(b) Ϫ3.14(10Ϫ11)i N
F ϭ Ϫ(5.73i ϩ 3.31j)10Ϫ9 N
h ϭ 0.414R

1/14
1/15

Wabs ϭ 883.9 N, Wrel ϭ 882.2 N
gh ϭ 29.9 ft/sec2, Wh ϭ 186.0 lb
␪ ϭ 1.770Њ
d ϭ 346 022 or 432 348 km
Res ϭ 1656
On earth: Rem ϭ 286 000
On moon: Rem ϭ 0.001677
RA ϭ 2.19, RB ϭ 2.21
[MLTϪ1] ϭ [MLTϪ1]

2/13
2/14
2/15
2/16
2/17
2/18
2/19
2/20
2/21
2/22
2/23
2/24
2/25
2/26

h ϭ 49.4 ft, t ϭ 4.24 sec, vB ϭ 56.4 ft/sec down
tAC ϭ 2.39 sec
v ϭ 25 ft/sec, a ϭ 31.2 ft/sec2, tacc ϭ 0.8 sec
vav ϭ Ϫ0.75 m/s, v ϭ Ϫ1.25 m/s
(a) v ϭ 21.9 m/s, (b) v ϭ 25.6 m/s
t ϭ 65.5 s, s ϭ 1.819 km
⌬a ϭ 0.5 m/s2, ⌬s ϭ 64 m
v ϭ 0.8 m/s
s ϭ 3.26 m, t ϭ 3.26 s
a ϭ 1.168 ft/sec2, v ϭ 99.8 mi/hr
s ϭ 713 m
s ϭ 330 m
s ϭ 2250 m
(a) t ϭ 0.0370 sec, (b) t ϭ 0.0555 sec

1/8
1/9
1/10
1/11
1/12
1/13

Chapter 2
2/1
2/2
2/3
2/4
2/5
2/6
2/7
2/8
2/9

2/10
2/11
2/12

v ϭ 75 m/s
t ϭ 2.11 sec, 7.89 sec
s ϭ 72 m, v ϭ 42 m/s, a ϭ 15 m/s2
a ϭ 150 mm/s2
⌬s ϭ Ϫ27 mm, D ϭ 45 mm, a ϭ constant
⌬s ϭ 24 m
a ϭ 3.61g
⌬s ϭ 1.248 m, D ϭ 1.419 m
v ϭ 3 – 30t ϩ 2t2 m/s
2
s ϭ Ϫ5 ϩ 3t Ϫ 15t2 ϩ t3 m
3
s ϭ 213 ft
v2 ϭ 139.0 ft/sec
h ϭ 2040 m, t ϭ 40.8 s

701

702

Problem Answers

2/27
2/28
2/29
2/30
2/31
2/32
2/33
2/34
2/35
2/36
2/37
2/38

vm ϭ 120 m/s, h ϭ 1.934 km
s ϭ 972 ft
t ϭ 0.917 s
v ϭ 1.587 in./sec
v ϭ 38.9 km/h
vmax ϭ 35.9 ft/sec
a ϭ Ϫ6.67 m/s2, t l ȍ
t ϭ 16.67 s
a ϭ Ϫ8.72 ft/sec2, t ϭ 2.74 sec
v ϭ 178.9 ft/sec
s ϭ 5810 ft
D ϭ 3710 ft
v02 ϩ 2gym
cϭ
2
ym

2/39
2/40

2/41
2/42
2/43
2/44
2/45
2/46
2/47
2/48
2/49
2/50
2/51
2/52
2/53
2/54
2/55
2/56
᭤ 2/57
᭤ 2/58

2/59
2/60
2/61
2/62
2/63
2/64

Particle 1: s ϭ

v0
k

(1 Ϫ eϪkt), v ϭ v0eϪkt

1
1
Particle 2: s ϭ v0t Ϫ kt3, v ϭ v0 Ϫ kt2
6
2
v0
Particle 3: s ϭ sin (Ίkt), v ϭ ϮΊv02 Ϫ ks2
k
K(L Ϫ D/2)
vϭ2
LD
K ϭ 1.073(10Ϫ3) ftϪ1, t ϭ 25.4 sec
t ϭ 50.8 s
D ϭ 65.3 ft, ⌬s ϭ 6.67 ft, s5 ϭ 3.67 ft
3v02 ϩ 6gym
cϭ
3
2ym
vmax ഡ 18 m/s
C2 2
1
ln 1 ϩ
v
Dϭ
2C2
C1 0
⌬t ϭ 10 s, s ϭ 416 m
(a) v ϭ 13,040 ft/sec, (b) v ϭ 12,290 ft/sec
(a) v ϭ 6490 ft/sec, (b) v ϭ 4990 ft/sec
1/(1Ϫn)
v ϭ [v01Ϫn ϩ c(nϪ1)t]
v0
v ϭ v0eϪkt, x ϭ (1 Ϫ eϪkt), v ϭ v0 Ϫ kx
k
(a) s ϭ 1206 m, (b) s ϭ 1268 m
1
D ϭ 0.693/k, t ϭ
kv0
x ϭ 0.831 ft
h ϭ 120.8 ft, vƒ ϭ 78.5 ft/sec
g
k
v ϭ c (eϪct Ϫ1) ϩ
(eϪbt Ϫ eϪct)
cϪb
t ϭ 105 sec, amax ϭ 11.73 ft/sec2
vav ϭ 20.6 m/s, ␪ ϭ 76.0Њ
aav ϭ 5 m/s2, ␪ ϭ 53.1Њ
v ϭ 6.20i ϩ 3.36j m/s, ␪ ϭ 27.9Њ
v ϭ 8.94 mm/s, ␪x ϭ 63.4Њ
a ϭ 4.47 mm/s2, ␪x ϭ 26.6Њ
v ϭ 24.2 ft/sec, a ϭ 25.3 ft/sec2
v ϭ 13.45 in./sec, a ϭ 26.8 in./sec2

Ί

΂

΃

2/65
2/66
2/67
2/68

t ϭ 24.7 sec, h ϭ 1.786 mi
(y Ϫ 2)3 ϭ 144x2, v ϭ 30 ft/sec
v0 ϭ 3.67 m/s, d ϭ 1.340 m
v 02
Rmax ϭ g

2/91

u ϭ 343 m/s
v0 ϭ 16.33 ft/sec, ␪ ϭ 66.8Њ
v0 ϭ 77.1 ft/sec, ␪ ϭ 31.1Њ
2.57 ft above B
␪ ϭ 50.6Њ, 2.50 ft right of B
␪ ϭ 14.91Њ
␪ ϭ 21.7Њ
␪ ϭ 5.57Њ
v ϭ 70.0 ft/sec, s ϭ 11.85 ft
␪ ϭ 48.7Њ or ␪ ϭ 53.6Њ
R ϭ 2970 m
u ϭ 14.41 m/s
␪1 ϭ 26.1Њ, ␪2 ϭ 80.6Њ
R ϭ 46.4 m, ␪ ϭ 23.3Њ
s ϭ 455 m, t ϭ 13.35 s
20.6 Յ v0 Յ 22.4 ft/sec
umax ϭ 1.135 m/s, umin ϭ 0.744 m/s
31.0Њ Յ ␪ Յ 34.3Њ or 53.1Њ Յ ␪ Յ 54.7Њ
␦ ϭ 7.76 ft
␣ ϭ 0.445Њ, h ϭ 500 ft
h ϭ 1.227 m
s ϭ 1.046 km, t ϭ 17.75 s
v 02
v0
Ri ϭ 0.667 g , ti ϭ 1.155 g

2/92

ƒ2 ϭ Ί1Ϫƒ1, ƒ2 ϭ

2/69
2/70
2/71
2/72
2/73
2/74
2/75
2/76
2/77
2/78
2/79
2/80
2/81
2/82
2/83
2/84
2/85
2/86
2/87
2/88
2/89
2/90

1
2
v0 cos ␪

᭤ 2/93

vx ϭ (v0 cos ␪)eϪkt, x ϭ

᭤ 2/94

eϪkt Ϫ
k
k
g
g
1
y ϭ (v0 sin ␪ ϩ )(1 Ϫ eϪkt) Ϫ t
k
k
k
g
vx l 0, vy l Ϫ
k
h ϭ 583 ft, tƒ ϭ 12.59 sec, d ϭ 746 ft

΂

vy ϭ v0 sin ␪ ϩ

᭤ 2/95
᭤ 2/96

2/97
2/98
2/100
2/101
2/102
2/103
2/104
2/105
2/106

g

΃

k
g

(1 Ϫ eϪkt)

90Њ ϩ ␣
, ␪ ϭ 45Њ, 60Њ, 67.5Њ
2
x ϭ 1242 ft, y ϭ 62.7 ft
vA ϭ 11.75 m/s, vB ϭ 13.46 m/s
at ϭ Ϯ8.39 ft/sec2
v ϭ 71.3 km/h
v ϭ 5.30 ft/sec, an ϭ 25.0 ft/sec2
a ϭ 0.269 m/s2
␳ ϭ 266 m
tA ϭ 8.97 s, tB ϭ 9.92 s, 23.9 m
tA ϭ 8.97 s, tB ϭ 8.89 s, 2.50 m
an ϭ 36.7 ft/sec2, at ϭ 20 ft/sec2
␪ϭ

Problem Answers

2/107
2/108
2/109
2/110
2/111
2/112
2/113
2/114
2/115
2/116
2/117
2/118
2/119
2/120
2/121
2/122

2/123
2/124
2/125
2/126
2/127
᭤ 2/128
᭤ 2/129
᭤ 2/130
᭤ 2/131
2/133
2/134
2/135
2/136
2/137
2/138
2/139
2/140
2/141
2/142
2/143
2/144
2/145
2/146

␳B ϭ 163.0 m
vA ϭ 25.8 m/s, vB ϭ 39.6 m/s
v ϭ 356 m/s, a ϭ 0.0260 m/s2
v ϭ 27.8(103) km/h
(a) a ϭ 7 ft/sec2, (b) a ϭ 17.97 ft/sec2
(c) a ϭ 8.82 ft/sec2
a ϭ 16en ϩ 16.10et ft/sec2
N ϭ 3.36 rev/min
P1: v ϭ 2 m/s, a1 ϭ 50 m/s2
P2: an ϭ 80 m/s2, a2 ϭ 85.4 m/s2
v ϭ 72 km/h
(a) ␳ ϭ 243 ft, ˙ ϭ Ϫ18.47 ft/sec2
v
(b) ␳ ϭ 133.4 ft, ˙ ϭ 0
v
(a) ␳ ϭ 142.2 ft, at ϭ Ϫ6.58 ft/sec2
(b) ␳ ϭ 149.7 ft, at ϭ 8.75 ft/sec2
␳ ϭ 41.7 in.
aP1 ϭ 338 m/s2, aP2 ϭ 1.5 m/s2
an ϭ 1.838 ft/sec2
␳ ϭ 1907 km, ˙ ϭ Ϫ12.65 m/s2
v
(a) a ϭ 2g right, ␪x ϭ 0
(b) a ϭ 38.9 m/s2, ␪x ϭ Ϫ59.7Њ
(c) a ϭ 97.3 m/s2, ␪x ϭ Ϫ168.4Њ
t ϭ 0.8 s: a ϭ 73.1 m/s2, ␪x ϭ Ϫ128.1Њ
t ϭ 1.2 s: a ϭ 19.62 m/s2, ␪x ϭ 180Њ
tA ϭ 10.52 s, tB ϭ 10.86 s
a ϭ 9.39 ft/sec2
␳ ϭ 18 480 km
␳ ϭ 437 mm, an ϭ 8.74 mm/s2, at ϭ 36.3 mm/s2
L ϭ 46.1 m
␳ ϭ 1.25 m
xC ϭ 22.5 m, yC ϭ Ϫ22.9 m
ar ϭ Ϫ12.80 m/s2, a␪ ϭ Ϫ8.80 m/s2

2/152
2/153
2/154
2/155
2/156
2/157
2/158

v ϭ 545 mm/s, a ϭ 632 mm/s2
˙
r
˙ ϭ 42.5 m/s, ␪ ϭ Ϫ0.1403 rad/s
2, ␪ ϭ 0.0813 rad/s2
r
¨ ϭ 11.52 m/s ¨
˙ ϭ 32.8 mm/s
l
a ϭ 2K 2ΊR2 Ϫ r02
v ϭ 0.377 m/s at ␣ ϭ 260Њ
a ϭ 0.272 m/s2 at ␣ ϭ 19.44Њ
˙
r
˙ ϭ Ϫ1.5 ft/sec, ␪ ϭ 4.50 rad/sec
2, ␪ ϭ 23.4 rad/sec2
r
¨ ϭ 11.69 ft/sec ¨
v ϭ 1200 ft/sec, a ϭ 67.0 ft/sec2
˙
r
˙ ϭ 1.512 m/s, ␪ ϭ 0.0495 rad/s
2, v ϭ 960 km/h
r
¨ ϭ 4.62 m/s
v02 sin2 ␣
r ϭ d, ˙ ϭ v0 cos ␣, ¨ ϭ
r
r
d
2
v0 sin ␣
1 2v0
˙
¨
␪ ϭ 0, ␪ ϭ
, ␪ ϭϪ
cos ␣ sin ␣ ϩ g
d
d d
¨
v ϭ 161.7 ft/sec, ␪ ϭ Ϫ0.0808 rad/sec

¨
a ϭ 8.62 ft/sec2, ␪ ϭ 0.01832 rad/sec2
2Ί4c2 Ϫ 4bc cos ␪ ϩ b2
aϭ␻
a ϭ 10.75K␣
v ϭ 529 m/s, ␤ ϭ 48.9Њ, a ϭ 9.76 m/s2
b2␻2
b␻
,aϭ
cot3 ␪
vϭ
sin ␪
h
vЈ ϭ 69.9 mi/hr
r
r
˙ ϭ 1.732 m/s, ¨ ϭ 3.33 m/s2
¨
␪ ϭ Ϫ38.5 rad/s2
r ϭ 0.256 m, ˙ ϭ 4.72 m/s, ␪ ϭ 38.7Њ
r
˙
␪ ϭ 6.46 rad/s
vA ϭ 1.190 m/s, ␪x ϭ 125.2Њ
aA ϭ 7.54 m/s2, ␪x ϭ 225Њ
v ϭ 0.296 m/s, a ϭ 0.345 m/s2, v ϭ 0.064i
ϩ 0.289j m/s, a ϭ Ϫ0.328i Ϫ 0.1086j m/s2
vr ϭ 96.2 m/s, v␪ ϭ 55.6 m/s, ar ϭ 10.29 m/s2
¨ ϭ Ϫ0.0390 rad/s2
␪

2/159 r ϭ 2b sin

΂ 4b ΃
att2

, ˙ ϭ att cos
r

΂ 4b ΃
att2

att2

˙ att
,␪ϭ
4b
2b
2/160 r ϭ 21 900 m, ˙ ϭ Ϫ73.0 m/s, ¨ ϭ Ϫ2.07 m/s2
r
r
˙
␪ ϭ 43.2Њ, ␪ ϭ 0.00312 rad/s
␪ϭ

2/161
2/162
2/163

˙
r
˙ ϭ 47.7 ft/sec, ␪ ϭ Ϫ41.0 deg/sec
˙
r
˙ ϭ Ϫ9.31 m/s, ␪ ϭ Ϫ0.568 rad/s
2, ␪ ϭ Ϫ1.653 rad/s2
¨
r
¨ ϭ 2.07 m/s

΂

2/147

2/148
2/149
2/150
2/151

703

᭤ 2/164

2/165
2/166

2/167
2/168
2/169
2/170

΃

¨
␪ ϭ Ϫ9.01(10Ϫ5) rad/s2
˙
r
˙ ϭ 3.58 m/s, ␪ ϭ 17.86 rad/s
2 ¨
r
¨ ϭ 315 m/s , ␪ ϭ Ϫ1510 rad/s2
r ϭ 224 m, ˙ ϭ 6.71 m/s, ¨ ϭ Ϫ4.59 m/s2
r
r
˙
¨
␪ ϭ 26.6Њ, ␪ ϭ 0.06 rad/s, ␪ ϭ Ϫ0.0518 rad/s2
r
r
˙ ϭ 8910 ft/sec, ¨ ϭ Ϫ1.790 ft/sec2
˙
␪ ϭ 3.48(10Ϫ4) rad/sec
¨ ϭ Ϫ1.398(10Ϫ7) rad/sec2
␪
r ϭ 51.0 ft, ˙ ϭ 91.4 ft/sec, ¨ ϭ Ϫ11.35 ft/sec2
r
r
˙
␪ ϭ 31.9Њ, ␪ ϭ Ϫ0.334 rad/sec
¨
␪ ϭ 0.660 rad/sec2
␪ ϭ 74.6Њ, ˙ ϭ 1.571 m/s2, ␳ ϭ 8.59 m
v
x ϭ 4700 ft, y ϭ 1710 ft, z ϭ 2220 ft
vx ϭ 235 ft/sec, vy ϭ 85.5 ft/sec, vz ϭ Ϫ211 ft/sec
ax ϭ ay ϭ 0, az ϭ Ϫ32.2 ft/sec2
a ϭ 27.5 m/s2
v␪ ϭ Ϫu sin ␪, vR ϭ u cos ␪ cos ␾
v␾ ϭ Ϫu cos ␪ sin ␾
amax ϭ Ίr2␻4 ϩ 16n4␲4z02
˙
vP ϭ Ί˙2 ϩ (l0 ϩ l)2␻2 ϩ h 2
l

aP ϭ Ί( ¨Ϫ (l0 ϩ l)␻2)2 ϩ 4˙2␻2ϩ ¨2
l
l
h
2/171 ar ϭ Ϫ19.82 ft/sec2, a␪ ϭ Ϫ2.91 ft/sec2
az ϭ Ϫ0.386 ft/sec2
˙
˙
2/172 R ϭ 92.0 km/h, ␪ ϭ 0.1988 rad/s
˙ ϭ 0.0731 rad/s
␾
¨
¨
2/173 R ϭ 20.1 m/s2, ␪ ϭ 0
¨ ϭ Ϫ0.0238 rad/s2
␾

704

Problem Answers

2/174 v ϭ Ίc2 ϩ K 2l2 sin2 ␤, a ϭ K sin ␤ΊK 2l2 ϩ 4c2
Ί3
vt
1
vt
vt
r cos r , y ϭ r sin r , z ϭ Ϫ r cos r
2/175 x ϭ
2
2
␤
bu sin ␤
, v␪ ϭ u sin
2/176 vR ϭ
2
␤
4b2sin2 ϩ h2
2
␤
Ϫhu cos
2
v␾ ϭ
␤
4b2 sin2 ϩ h2
2
2/177 v ϭ 2.96 m/s, a ϭ 0.672 m/s2
2/178 vA ϭ 1.347 m/s, aA ϭ 8.41 m/s2
2/179 vP ϭ 2.85 m/s, aP ϭ 5.80 m/s2
2/180 aR ϭ Ϫ5.10 m/s2, a␪ ϭ 7.64 m/s2, a␾ ϭ Ϫ0.3 m/s2

Ί

Ί

᭤ 2/181 vR ϭ 0, v␪ ϭ R␻Ί1 Ϫ (h /2R)2
᭤ 2/182

2/183
2/184
2/185
2/186

2/187
2/188
2/189
2/190
2/191
2/192
2/193
2/194
2/195
2/196
2/197
2/198
2/199
2/200
2/201
2/202
2/203
᭤ 2/204
᭤ 2/205
᭤ 2/206

2/207
2/208

v␾ ϭ h␻/Ί1 Ϫ (h /2R)2
˙
ar ϭ b ␪ 2(tan2␥ sin2 ␤ Ϫ 1)eϪ␪ tan␥ sin ␤
where ␤ ϭ tanϪ1(b /h)
vA/B ϭ 15i Ϫ 22.5j m/s, aA/B ϭ 4.5j m/s2
aA/B ϭ 10.86 ft/sec2
vA/B ϭ 1442 km/h, ␤ ϭ 33.7Њ west of south
vW/R ϭ Ϫ12.29i Ϫ 18.60j mi/hr
(22.3 mi/hr, 33.4Њ west of south)
vW/R ϭ Ϫ12.29i ϩ 1.396j mi/hr
(12.37 mi/hr, 6.48Њ north of west)
␣ ϭ 7.18Њ, vA ϭ 79.4 mi/hr
vA/B ϭ 3.00i ϩ 1.999j m/s
aA/B ϭ 3.63i ϩ 0.628j m/s2
vC ϭ 1.383 knots, ␤ ϭ 231Њ
␣ ϭ 23.8Њ
vB ϭ 6.43 m/s
␪ ϭ 28.7Њ below normal
␣ ϭ 18.87Њ
vB/W ϭ 27.3i ϩ 85j mi/hr
(89.3 mi/hr, 17.82Њ east of north)
vB ϭ 523i ϩ 16.67j ft/sec
vB ϭ 206 km/h, aB ϭ 0.457 m/s2
aB ϭ 1.389 m/s2
␤ ϭ 55.6Њ
˙ ¨
r
¨ ϭ r ␪ 2, ␪ ϭ Ϫ2r ␪ /r
˙˙
vr ϭ 924 km/h, vn ϭ 354 km/h
aB/A ϭ 0.787 m/s2, ␤ ϭ 93.5Њ
aB/A ϭ 0.733i ϩ 29.2j ft/sec2
␣ ϭ 33.3Њ, vA/B ϭ 73.1i ϩ 73.1j ft/sec
¨
r
¨ ϭ Ϫ0.637 m/s2, ␪ ϭ 1.660(10Ϫ4) rad/s2
(a) vA/B ϭ 50i ϩ 50j m/s, aA/B ϭ 1.25j m/s2
(b) ˙r ϭ 0.884 m/s2, ␳r ϭ 5660 m
v
vA/B ϭ 71.5i Ϫ 47.4j ft/sec
vA ϭ 0.4 m/s down
vA ϭ 1.8 m/s up, aA ϭ 3 m/s2 down

2/209
2/210
2/211
2/212
2/213
2/214
2/215
2/216
2/217
2/218
2/219
2/220
2/221

aA ϭ 2 ft/sec2 up
7aA ϩ aB ϭ 0
h ϭ 400 mm
t ϭ 200 s
v ϭ 1.5 m/s up
vA ϩ 4vB ϭ 0, one
vA ϩ 4vB ϩ 2vC ϭ 0, two
3yvA
vB ϭ Ϫ
2Ίy2 ϩ b2
2Ίx2 ϩ h2
vA ϭ
vB
x
vB/A ϭ 1 ft/sec, aB/A ϭ 2 ft/sec2, vC ϭ 4 ft/sec
vA ϭ 2.76 m/s
v ϭ 83.8 mm/s
2
L2vA
ax ϭ Ϫ
2 Ϫ y2)3/2
(L

2/222 vB ϭ
2/223
2/224
᭤ 2/225
᭤ 2/226

2/227
2/228
2/229
2/230
2/231
2/232

2/233
2/234
2/235
2/236
2/237
2/238

2/239
2/240
2/241
2/242
2/243

᭤ 2/244

2/245

s ϩ Ί2x

vA
x ϩ Ί2s
Ί2vB
vA ϭ
␪
␪
cos ϩ sin
2
2
vB ϭ 62.9 mm/s up
aB ϭ 11.93 mm/s2 up
2x2 ϩ h2
vB ϭ v A
x2 ϩ h 2
v ϭ Ϫ7.27 m/s
v␾ ϭ 15 ft/sec, vB ϭ 61.8 ft/sec
(311, 20) ft
t1 ϭ 2.27 sec, t2 ϭ 8.48 sec
t ϭ 208 s, h ϭ 418 km
1
r ϭ r0
˙
␶␪ 2
1ϩ
2␲
˙
¨
␪ ϭ 13.86 rad/sec, ␪ ϭ 215 rad/sec2
34.3 ft
␳ ϭ 9.53 km
vP ϭ 2.72 m/s
t ϭ 53.5 sec
ar ϭ 5Ί3 ft/sec2, ay ϭ Ϫ5Ί3 ft/sec2, at ϭ 0
6Ί3
ft
an ϭ 10Ί3 ft/sec2, ␳ ϭ
5
␤ ϭ 12.09Њ
(Ϫ1255, 1193, 0) ft
aA/B ϭ 4.58 m/s2, ␤ ϭ 20.6Њ west of north
␳ ϭ 1.499 m, ax ϭ Ϫ5 m/s2
˙
r
r
˙ ϭ 15 m/s, ¨ ϭ 4.44 m/s2, ␪ ϭ 0.325 rad/s
¨
␪ ϭ Ϫ0.0352 rad/s2, an ϭ 6.93 m/s2
at ϭ 4 m/s2, ␳ ϭ 129.9 m
(a) a ϭ bΊK4 ϩ ␻4␪02 cos2␾
(b) a ϭ bKΊK2 ϩ 4␻2␪02
vB ϭ 46.8 mm/s up

Ί

΂ ΃

Problem Answers
aB ϭ 7.86 mm/s2 up
t ϭ 1.473 s, x ϭ 0.1178 m
k ϭ 0.00323 ftϪ1, vt ϭ 99.8 ft/sec, vЈ ϭ 113.5 ft/sec
(a) a ϭ Ϫ30.3 m/s2
(b) a ϭ 0
(c) a ϭ 30.3 m/s2
*2/250 ␪max ϭ 110.4Њ at t ϭ 0.802 sec
˙
␪ max ϭ 3.79 rad/s at t ϭ 0.324 sec
␪ ϭ 90Њ at t ϭ 0.526 sec

*2/246
*2/247
*2/248
*2/249

*2/251 (vA/B)max ϭ 70 m/s at t ϭ 47.1 s and
sB ϭ 1264 m, (vA/B)min ϭ 10 m/s at t ϭ 23.6 s and
sB ϭ 557 m, (aA/B)max ϭ 6.12 m/s2 at t ϭ 0 and
sB ϭ 0, (aA/B)min ϭ 2.52 m/s2 at t ϭ 10 s and
sB ϭ 150 m
2/252 ␣ ϭ 42.2Њ, R ϭ 101.3 m
2/253 amin ϭ 9.03 m/s2 at ␪ ϭ 44.3Њ and t ϭ 0.237 s
amax ϭ 10.76 m/s2 at ␪ ϭ 0 and t ϭ 0
2/254 vmax ϭ 10 in./sec at t ϭ 0.330 sec, x ϭ 2.45 in.

Chapter 3
3/1
3/2
3/3
3/4
3/5
3/6
3/7
3/8
3/9
3/10
3/11
3/12
3/13
3/14
3/15
3/16
3/17
3/18
3/19
3/20
3/21
3/22
3/23
3/24

3/25
3/26
3/27
3/28
3/29
3/30
3/31
3/32
3/33

t ϭ 1.784 s, x ϭ 6.24 m
(a) t ϭ 5.59 s, x ϭ 19.58 m
(b) Crate does not stop
(a) no motion, (b) a ϭ 3.45 ft/sec2 down incline
R ϭ 846 N, L ϭ 110.4 N; R, L l 0
F ϭ 2890 N
a
n ϭ sin ␪ ϩ g
su ϭ 807 m, sd ϭ 751 m
a ϭ 3.58 ft/sec2 up
a ϭ 4.96 m/s2 up incline
a ϭ g(sin ␪1 Ϫ sin ␪2)
(a) a ϭ 6.44 ft/sec2, (b) a ϭ 16.10 ft/sec2
(a) a ϭ Ϫ0.257 m/s2, (b) a ϭ Ϫ0.513 m/s2
12 s
T ϭ 1042 N
T1 ϭ 39,200 lb, T100 ϭ 392 lb
a ϭ 5.66 m/s2
F ϭ 0.0206 lb
FA ϭ 4080 lb up
TA ϭ 75.0 N, TB ϭ 55.4 N
␮k ϭ 0.429
(a) a ϭ 0, (b) a ϭ 1.390 m/s2 right
Not possible
␮k ϭ 0.555
(a) aA ϭ 1.095 m/s2, aB ϭ 0.981 m/s2
(b) aA ϭ aB ϭ 0.667 m/s2
a ϩ g sin ␪
␤ ϭ tanϪ1
g cos ␪
n ϭ 66.0%
k ϭ 5 lb/in.
T ϭ 171.3 N
aA ϭ 1.450 m/s2 down incline
aB ϭ 0.725 m/s2 up, T ϭ 105.4 N
x ϭ 201 m
2P
vϭ
␳ Ϫ ␮k gL

΄

Ί

΅

aA ϭ 1.364 m/s2 right
aB ϭ 9.32 m/s2 down, T ϭ 46.6 N
aB ϭ 2.37 m/s2 down, T ϭ 8.21 N

705

3/34
3/35
3/36
3/37
3/38
3/39
3/40
3/41
3/42
᭤ 3/43

᭤ 3/44
᭤ 3/45
᭤ 3/46

3/47
3/48
3/49
3/50
3/51
3/52
3/53
3/54
3/55
3/56
3/57
3/58
3/59
3/60
3/61
3/62
3/63
3/64
3/65
3/66
3/67
3/68

ax ϭ 32.2(14 – 30x), v ϭ 14.47 ft/sec
(a) a ϭ 0, (b) a ϭ 0.714 m/s2 left
Case (a), v ϭ 7.43 m/s
a ϭ 1.406 m/s2
1
␲
Յ␪Յ
tanϪ1
␮s
2
(a) h ϭ 55.5 m, (b) h ϭ 127.4 m
(a) vs ϭ 0.327 m/s
(b) t ϭ 0.0768 s, y ϭ 0.01529 m
v ϭ 2100 m/s
␪ ϭ 5.88Њ, 47.2Њ
0 Յ P Յ 27 lb: No motion
27 Յ P Յ 54 lb: aA ϭ aB ϭ 0.1789P Ϫ 3.22
P Ն 54 lb: aA ϭ 4.83 ft/sec2
aB ϭ 0.322P Ϫ 9.66
v0 ϭ 11.19 km/s
T ϭ 138.0 N, a ϭ 0.766 m/s2
(a) T ϭ 8.52 N, (b) T ϭ 16.14 N
NA ϭ 10.89 N, NB ϭ 8.30 N
˙
(a) N ϭ 1.374 lb, (b) v ϭ Ϫ16.10 ft/sec2
R ϭ 1.173 N, at ϭ Ϫ7.21 m/s2
(a) R ϭ 0.25 lb, (b) R ϭ 0.271 lb
␪ ϭ 45.3Њ
P ϭ 4 lb (side A)
N ϭ 0.0241 lb
␮s ϭ 0.540
N ϭ 8.63 rev/min
␻ ϭ 1.064 rad/s
(a) vB ϭ 54.2 m/s, (b) NA ϭ 241 N
˙
␪ ϭ 3.37 deg/s
an ϭ 0.818g, F ϭ 2460 lb
at ϭ Ϫ22.0 ft/sec2
vA ϭ 140.7 ft/sec, vB ϭ 163.8 ft/sec
k ϭ cos2 ␪
s ϭ v0 /Ίkg
F ϭ 920 lb
NA ϭ 3380 N, NB ϭ 1617 N
D ϭ 45.0 kN, L ϭ 274 kN
T ϭ 1.76 N, F␪ ϭ Ϫ3.52 N
F ϭ 165.9 N

΂ ΃

706

Problem Answers

3/69
3/70

v ϭ Ίgr tan ␪
␻ ϭ 5.01 rad/s

3/71

ϭ 0.0707 Ϫ 0.0354t
ΆT ϭ 0.0707 ϩ 0.0354t
N
T ϭ Ϫ0.0707 ϩ 0.0354t
1.414 Յ t Յ 5 s Ά
N ϭ 0.0707 ϩ 0.0354t
0 Յ t Յ 1.414 s

2

2

2

2

1

3/72
3/73
3/74
3/75
3/76
3/77
3/78
3/79
3/80
3/81
3/82
3/83
3/84
3/85
3/86
3/87
3/88
3/89
3/90
᭤ 3/91
᭤ 3/92
᭤ 3/93
᭤ 3/94
᭤ 3/95
᭤ 3/96

3/97
3/98
3/99
3/100
3/101
3/102
3/103
3/104
3/105

2

P ϭ 27.0 N, Ps ϭ 19.62 N
␳ ϭ 3000 km, ˙ ϭ 6.00 m/s2
v
Dynamic: Fr ϭ 4.79 N, F␪ ϭ 14.00 N
Static: Fr ϭ 5.89 N, F␪ ϭ 10.19 N
L g
, N ϭ 2mg
vϭ
2␲ b
v ϭ 149.4 ft/sec, vmin ϭ 0, vmax ϭ 345 ft/sec
R ϭ 2.14 ϩ 1.913 cos ␪ N, vB ϭ 2.06 m/s
x ϭ 118.8 mm, N ϭ 25.3 N
F ϭ 4.39 N
T ϭ 2.52 lb, N ϭ 0.326 lb (side B)
1
␮sg 2 Ϫ 1
Nϭ
4␲
r␣

Ί

Ί΂ ΃

⍀ ϭ 4.77 rad/s
R␻2
k ϭ 1 Ϫ g , WЈ ϭ 99.655 N

3/120
3/121
3/122
3/123
3/124

P ϭ 2.21 N, N ϭ 14.22 N
r0␻0 ␻ t
r0
(e 0 Ϫ eϪ␻0t), r ϭ (eϪ␻0t ϩ e␻0t)
vr ϭ
2
2
v␪ ϭ r0␻0 cosh ␻0t
P ϭ 8.62 lb
at ϭ 10 m/s2, NA ϭ NB ϭ 2 N, T ϭ 2.83 N
at ϭ 10 m/s2, NA ϭ NB ϭ 4.83 N, T ϭ 5.23 N
(a) F ϭ 1562 lb, (b) F ϭ 2260 lb
(c) F ϭ 1562 lb
˙
r
˙ ϭ 9620 ft/sec, ␪ ϭ 1.133(10Ϫ4) rad/sec
¨
r
¨ ϭ Ϫ1.153 ft/sec2, ␪ ϭ Ϫ2.72(10Ϫ8) rad/sec2
T ϭ 2.53 N, R ϭ 1.028 N (lower side)
␲
␪max ϭ , T ϭ mg(3 sin ␪ ϩ 3 cos ␪ Ϫ 2)
2
v ϭ 5.52 m/s
N ϭ 81.6 N, R ϭ 38.7 N
v02 ϩ Ίv04 ϩ r 2g2
r
sϭ
ln
rg
2␮k
mg
Nϭ
Ͼ0
(1 ϩ 4k2x2)3/2
(a) U1–2 ϭ Ϫ60 J, (b) U1–2 ϭ 2.35 J
vB ϭ 3.05 m/s
Uƒ ϭ Ϫ672 ft-lb
v ϭ 17.18 ft/sec
k ϭ 974 lb/in.
R ϭ 3340 lb
v ϭ Ί2gh
Q ϭ Ϫ1.835 J
(a) and (b) v ϭ 8.10 m/s

΄

3/106
3/107
3/108
3/109
3/110
3/111
3/112
3/113
3/114
3/115
3/116
3/117
3/118
3/119

΅

3/125
3/126
3/127
3/128
3/129
3/130
3/131
3/132
3/133
3/134
3/135
3/136

3/137
3/138
3/139
3/140
3/141
3/142
3/143
3/144

P ϭ 0.400 hp
(a) s ϭ 0.663 m, (b) s ϭ 0.349 m
(a) s ϭ 1.853 m, (b) s ϭ 1.226 m
(a) v ϭ 2.56 m/s, (b) x ϭ 98.9 mm
(a) v ϭ 5.93 ft/sec, (b) v ϭ 6.55 ft/sec
P ϭ 0.393 hp, P ϭ 293 W
v ϭ 1.881 m/s
e ϭ 0.764
Q ϭ 903 kJ
v ϭ 7.08 ft/sec
R ϭ 4.05 kN, P ϭ 52.2 N
R ϭ 4.05 kN, ⌬Q ϭ 1620 J
e ϭ 0.892
At B: P ϭ 193.4 kW, Halfway: P ϭ 136.7 kW
F ϭ 6960 N
(a) F ϭ 61,200 lb, (b) P ϭ 3270 hp
(c) P ϭ 6530 hp, (d) P ϭ 2670 hp
v ϭ 13.37 ft/sec
v0 ϭ 6460 m/s
(a) P ϭ 0, (b) P ϭ 287 W, (c) P ϭ 0
5mg(h ϩ d)
kϭ
d5
4R
(a) NB ϭ 4mg, (b) NC ϭ 7mg, (c) s ϭ
1 ϩ ␮kΊ3
v ϭ 5.30 m/s
v ϭ 17.48 ft/sec
vA ϭ 3.44 m/s
vC ϭ 3.59 m/s
␦ ϭ 0.1445 m
Pin ϭ 36.8 kW
k ϭ 8.79 kN/m
v ϭ 7.80 ft/sec
v ϭ 1.734 m/s, vЈ ϭ 1.889 m/s
␦ ϭ 29.4 mm
(a) P30 ϭ 5 hp, P60 ϭ 16 hp
(b) Pup ϭ 35.2 hp, Pdown ϭ Ϫ3.17 hp
v ϭ 70.9 mi/hr
(a) v ϭ 0.496 m/s, (b) xmax ϭ 186.4 mm
(c) xss ϭ 93.2 mm
v ϭ 5.46 ft/sec
v ϭ 3.65 ft/sec
v ϭ 3.43 m/s, x ϭ 48.5 mm
(a) vB ϭ 9.40 m/s, (b) ␦ ϭ 54.2 mm
(a) NC ϭ 77.7 N, (b) NC ϭ 10.19 N
(c) NE ϭ 35.3 N down
y ϭ 0.224 m
kR2
vB ϭ 2gR ϩ m (3 – 2Ί2)

Ί
kR
v ϭ 4gR ϩ m (3 – 2Ί2)
Ί
kR
N ϭ m΄5g ϩ m (3 – 2Ί2)΅
2

C

3/145 W ϭ 88.1 lb

Problem Answers
v ϭ 1.248 ft/sec
v0 ϭ 6460 m/s
Uƒ ϭ Ϫ2.36 J, Fav ϭ 3.38 N
(a) v ϭ 3.84 ft/sec, (b) x ϭ 0.510 in.
˙
k ϭ 393 N/m, v ϭ 1.370 m/s, ␪ ϭ 2.28 rad/s
˙
␪ ϭ 4.22 rad/s
vA ϭ 0.616 m/s, vB ϭ 0.924 m/s
vB ϭ 8.54 ft/sec
k ϭ 86.8 N/m, v ϭ 1.371 m/s
(a) v ϭ 3.06 ft/sec, (b) v ϭ 1.641 ft/sec
v ϭ 0.331 m/s
P ϭ 2.86 lb
v ϭ 4.93 m/s
v ϭ 3.43 ft/sec
vB ϭ 26 300 km/h
xmax ϭ 105.9 mm, vmax ϭ 1.493 m/s, x ϭ 27.2 mm
v ϭ 20.4 mi/hr
␦ ϭ vΊm/k
v2 ϭ 35.1 km/h
k ϭ 155.1 N/m
(vB)max ϭ 0.962 m/s
␪ ϭ 43.8Њ
(a) m ϭ 0.528 kg, (b) v ϭ 1.005 m/s
v ϭ 1.143 m/s
(a) k ϭ 111.9 N/m, (b) v ϭ 0.522 m/s
˙
␪ ϭ Ϫ1.045 rad/s
␲ 4
3/172 v ϭ gr 2 ϩ ␲

3/146
3/147
3/148
3/149
3/150
3/151
3/152
3/153
3/154
3/155
3/156
3/157
3/158
3/159
3/160
3/161
3/162
3/163
3/164
3/165
3/166
3/167
3/168
3/169
3/170
3/171

3/173
3/174
3/175
3/176
3/177
3/178
3/179
3/180
3/181
3/182
3/183
3/184
3/185
3/186
3/187
3/188
3/189
3/190
3/191
3/192
3/193
3/194
3/195

Ί ΂

΃

1.7 N ⅐ s
F ϭ 3.03 kN
v2 ϭ 188.5i Ϫ 74j ϩ 47k m/s
͉⌬E ͉ ϭ 13 480 J, n ϭ 99.9%
⌬R ϭ 568 N
␮k ϭ 0.302
vB ϭ 1.652 m/s down
t ϭ 7.73 s
(a) v ϭ 2.44 mi/hr, (b) ͉⌬E ͉ ϭ 2230 ft-lb
vC ϭ 1.231 m/s left
R ϭ 423 lb
v ϭ 2.10 m/s
x
x
˙1 ϭ 2.90 m/s right, ˙2 ϭ 0.483 m/s left
t ϭ 12.18 min
v ϭ 5.86 ft/sec
(a) v1 ϭ 0, (b) v4 ϭ 2.69 m/s right
T ϭ 2780 N
v ϭ 190.9 m/s, ͉⌬E ͉ ϭ 17.18(103) J
x
x
˙1 ϭ 2.05 m/s left, ˙2 ϭ 0.878 m/s right
v1 ϭ 0.417 m/s, v3 ϭ 8.96 m/s
vƒ ϭ 0.00264 m/s, Fav ϭ 59.5 N
v1 ϭ 0, v3 ϭ 2.42 ft/sec, v5 ϭ 6.44 ft/sec, v7 ϭ 0
R ϭ 14.96 kN

3/196 v ϭ
3/197
3/198
3/199
3/200

3/201
3/202
3/203
3/204
3/205
3/206
3/207
3/208
3/209
3/210
3/211
᭤ 3/212
᭤ 3/213
᭤ 3/214
3/215
3/216

3/217
3/218

707

0
1
1 Ϫ eϪbt΃, s ϭ
t ϩ (eϪbt Ϫ 1)΅
mb ΂
mb ΄
b

F

F0

t ϭ 4 min 33 sec
v ϭ 3.42 m/s
v2 ϭ 1.423 m/s down incline, t ϭ 8.25 s
(a) vЈ ϭ 13.33 mi/hr
(b) aA ϭ Ϫ97.8 ft/sec2, aB ϭ 195.6 ft/sec2
(c) R ϭ 12,150 lb
v ϭ 0.663 km/h
v ϭ 0.1935 km/h
v ϭ 17.82 mi/hr, ␪ ϭ 54.7Њ
v ϭ 15.62 ft/sec, ␪ ϭ 50.2Њ
v ϭ 6.61 m/s
v1 ϭ 0, v3 ϭ 0.468 m/s, v5 ϭ 5.30 m/s, v7 ϭ 0
R ϭ 472 lb, a ϭ 4660g, d ϭ 0.900 in.
v ϭ 5.20 knots
2
mA
r
sϭ
␮k mA ϩ mC
Rx ϭ 559 lb, Ry ϭ 218 lb
R ϭ 43.0 N, ␤ ϭ 8.68Њ
(a) v ϭ 3.10 m/s, (b) v ϭ 7.23 m/s
(c) v ϭ 9.10 m/s
mA
2gl
vB ϭ m
B
1 ϩ mA /mB
v2 ϭ 40.0 mm/s
HO ϭ 69.3 kg ⅐ m2/s
(a) G ϭ 8.49i Ϫ 8.49j kg ⅐ m/s
(b) HO ϭ Ϫ23.2k kg ⅐ m2/s
(c) T ϭ 24 J
͉H͉ ϭ 389 N ⅐ m ⅐ s, ͉M͉ ϭ 260 N ⅐ m
(HO)2 ϭ 34i ϩ 0.1333j ϩ 19.6k kg ⅐ m2/s

΂

΃

Ί

˙
3/219 HO ϭ mv(Ϫci ϩ ak), HO ϭ F(bi Ϫ aj)
5v
3/220 ␻ ϭ
3L
˙
3/221 (a) HO ϭ mrΊ2gr, HO ϭ mgr
˙O ϭ 0
(b) HO ϭ 2mrΊgr, H
2m1
v1
˙
3/222 ␪ ϭ
m1 ϩ 4m2 L

΂

΃

3/223 t ϭ 15.08 s
3/224 vP ϭ 17,723 mi/hr
˙
3/225 HB ϭ 1.113k lb-ft
2␻
d␻
3/226
ϭϪ r
dr
3/227 ␻ ϭ 0.1721 rad/s CW
3/228 ␻ ϭ ␻0/4, n ϭ 3/4
3/229 vB ϭ 47 850 m/s, vP ϭ 58 980 m/s
˙
˙
3/230 A: (HO)z ϭ 0, B: (HO)z ϭ Ϫ0.120 kg ⅐ m2/s2
2mv03 sin2 ␪ cos ␪
3/231 (a) HO ϭ 0, (b) HO ϭ
g
1
2k
3/232 HO ϭ Ϫ2mgut

708

Problem Answers

3/233 B: HA ϭ 0, HD ϭ mΊg␳3 CCW
C: HA ϭ 0.714mΊg␳3 CCW, HD ϭ 1.126mΊg␳3 CCW
3/234 vr ϭ 88,870 ft/sec, v␪ ϭ 125,700 ft/sec
3/235 ␻Ј ϭ 2.77 rad/s CCW, ␪ ϭ 52.1Њ
3/236 TB ϭ 0.745 lb
3/237 ␪ ϭ 52.9Њ
᭤ 3/238 ␻ ϭ 3.00 rad/s, U ϭ 5.34 J
3/239 e ϭ 0.829, n ϭ 31.2%
3/240 v0 ϭ 4.20 m/s
3/241 v1 ϭ 4.52 m/s left, v2 ϭ 2.68 m/s right
Ј
Ј
3/242 F ϭ 107.0 N left
m1
3/243 m ϭ e
2
u
(1 ϩ e)2
4
m
1ϩe
v
␦ϭ
k
2
vAЈ ϭ 0.633v, vBЈ ϭ 0.733v
h2 1/4
eϭ
h
h ϭ 10.94 in., h2 ϭ 7.43 in.
m ϭ 90 kg, v ϭ 2.66 m/s, ⌬E ϭ 2470 J
d
(a) x ϭ , (b) x ϭ 0.286d
3
e ϭ 0.333
e ϭ 0.434
1 ϩ e nϪ1
vn ϭ
v1
2
R ϭ 1.613 m
L2 ϭ eL1
(a) h ϭ 14.98 in., (b) h ϭ 16.25 in.
vB ϭ 21.7 km/h
vAЈ ϭ 6.73 ft/sec at ␪A ϭ 63.5Њ
vBЈ ϭ 3.22 ft/sec at ␪B ϭ 270Њ, n ϭ 44.4%
␪ ϭ 2.92(10Ϫ4)Њ
vAЈ ϭ 6.83 m/s at ␪A ϭ 180Њ
vBЈ ϭ 6.51 m/s at ␪B ϭ 50.2Њ, n ϭ 34.6%
(vAЈ)x ϭ Ϫ1.672 m/s, (vAЈ)y ϭ 1.649 m/s
(vBЈ)x ϭ 6.99 m/s, (vBЈ)y ϭ Ϫ3.84 m/s
g
d
2
hЈ , vx ϭ
eϭ
ΊhЈ ϩ ΊhЈ ϩ h
hЈ ϩ h

3/244 v ϭ
3/245
3/246
3/247
3/248
3/249
3/251
3/252
3/253
3/254
3/255
3/256
3/257
3/258
3/259
3/260
3/261
3/262

3/263

΃Ί

΂

΂ ΃

΂

Ί

΃

Ί

␪ ϭ 82.3Њ, Ϫ22.3Њ
h2 ϭ 0.385 m
␣ ϭ 11.37Њ, 78.6Њ
v ϭ 18.51 mi/sec
v ϭ 7569 m/s
See Prob. 1/14 and its answer
⌬v ϭ 1.987 mi/sec
(a) vrel ϭ 16,227 mi/hr
(b) vrel ϭ 18,306 mi/hr
3/272 ⌬h ϭ 88.0 km

3/264
3/265
᭤ 3/266
3/267
3/268
3/269
3/270
3/271

3/273
3/274
3/275
3/276
3/277
3/278
3/279
3/280
3/281
3/282
3/283
3/284
3/285
3/286
3/287
3/288
3/289
3/290
3/291
3/292
3/293
3/294
3/295
* 3/296
᭤ 3/297
᭤ 3/298

e ϭ 0.01196, ␶ ϭ 1 h 30 min 46 s
vP ϭ 3745 mi/hr
⌬v ϭ 534 m/s
ha ϭ 32 600 km
(a) v ϭ 7544 m/s, (b) v ϭ 7912 m/s
(c) v ϭ 10 398 m/s, (d) v ϭ 10 668 m/s
⌬v ϭ 3217 m/s, v ϭ 7767 m/s, ␪ ϭ 90Њ
hmax ϭ 899 mi
t ϭ 64.6 days
⌬t ϭ 71.6 sec
⌬t ϭ 32.9 s
vP ϭ 1683 m/s, vA ϭ 1609 m/s, ⌬v ϭ 18.35 m/s
vB ϭ 10,551 ft/sec, b ϭ 17,833 mi
␶Ј ϭ 1 h 36 min 25 s, ␶Ј Ϫ ␶ ϭ 6 min 4 s
e sin ␪
tan ␤ ϭ
1 ϩ e cos ␪
⌬v ϭ 302 ft/sec
⌬v ϭ 148 ft/sec
␣ ϭ Ϯ3.39Њ
␤ ϭ 153.3Њ
␶ƒ ϭ 658.69 h, ␶nƒ ϭ 654.68 h
g
R
1Ϫ
⌬vA ϭ R
RϩH
RϩH
p ϭ 0.0514 rad/s
⌬v ϭ 2940 m/s
t ϭ 162.5 s
h ϭ 922,000 mi
⌬vA ϭ 2370 m/s, ⌬vB ϭ 1447 m/s
a ϭ 6572 km (parallel to the x-axis)
␶ ϭ 5301 s, e ϭ 0.01284
va ϭ 7690 m/s, vp ϭ 7890 m/s
rmax ϭ 6.66(106) m, rmin ϭ 6.49(106) m

Ί

΂ Ί

΂

΃

΃

1
1
3/299 arel ϭ k␦ m ϩ m
1
2
3/300 ␮k ϭ 0.382
3/301 G ϭ 9i kg ⅐ m/s, Grel ϭ 3i kg ⅐ m/s
T ϭ 13.5 J, Trel ϭ 1.5 J
HO ϭ Ϫ4.5k kg ⅐ m2/s
(HB)rel ϭ Ϫ1.5k kg ⅐ m2/s
3/302 P ϭ 66.9 kN
3/303 F ϭ 376 lb
3/304 F ϭ 194.0 kN
3/305 xC/T ϭ 2.83 m, vrel ϭ 2.46 m/s
3/307 (vrel)max ϭ a0Ίm/k
3/308 a0 ϭ 16.99 m/s2, R ϭ 0
3/309 (a) and (b) T ϭ 112 J
3/310 T ϭ 3ma0 sin ␪, T␲/2 ϭ 90 N
3/311 T0 ϭ m(g ϩ a0)(3 – 2 cos ␪0)
3/312 Prel ϭ 0.1206 hp
3/313 (a) and (b) h2 ϭ e2h1
1/2
3/314 vA ϭ [v02 ϩ 2gl sin ␪ ϩ 2v0 cos ␪Ί2gl sin ␪]
2␥ m/s2
3/315 grel ϭ 9.825 – 0.03382 cos

Problem Answers
3/317 Uƒ ϭ Ϫ7.54 J
3/318 vB ϭ 2.87 m/s, vC ϭ 1.533 m/s
3/319 P ϭ 1.936 kW
a
3/320 ␪ ϭ tanϪ1 g

3/335
3/336
3/337
3/338
3/339
᭤ 3/340
᭤ 3/341

΂΃

3/321 k ϭ 3.18 kN/m
3/322 R ϭ 46.7 N
3/323 vA ϭ 7451 m/s, e ϭ 0.0295
mgR(5 ϩ 2␮k)
3/324 ␦ ϭ
k
3/325 rmax ϭ 5.29(109) km

᭤ 3/342

Ί

u2
u2
3/326 TB ϭ m r ϩ 2g sin ␪ , TC ϭ m r ϩ 5g sin ␪

΂

΃

΂

΃

t ϭ 2.02 s
5
u ϭ 2ΊgR, xmin ϭ 2R
F ϭ 2650 lb
v ϭ 6.55 ft/sec, x ϭ 0.316 ft, n ϭ 0.667
T ϭ 424 N
(a) at ϭ Ϫ10.75 m/s2, (b) at ϭ Ϫ14.89 m/s2
7
3/333 vrel ϭ
gl left
3
mg d2
3/334 ␦ ϭ
ϩ 2␳(1 ϩ ␮k), d ϭ 2Ί2␳
2␳
k
3/327
3/328
3/329
3/330
3/331
3/332

Ί
Ί Ί

* 3/343
* 3/344
* 3/345
* 3/346
* 3/347
3/348
* 3/349
* 3/350
* 3/351
* 3/352
* 3/353
* 3/354

␦ ϭ 2.55 in.
Fav ϭ 428 lb
s ϭ 2.28 m
tЈ ϭ 8.50 sec
v1 ϭ 1.741 m/s, v2 ϭ 0.201 m/s
vЈ ϭ 182.9 mi/hr
P30 ϭ 3 hp, P60 ϭ 16 hp, t ϭ 205 sec, s ϭ 5900 ft
g
(cosh ␪ Ϫ cos ␪)
rϭ
2␻02
38.7Њ Յ ␪ Յ 65.8Њ
˙
␪ ϭ 8.09Ί0.5 sin ␪ ϩ cos ␪ Ϫ 1 rad/s, ␪max ϭ 53.1Њ
͉vA ͉max ϭ 3.86 m/s at sB Ϫ sB0 ϭ 0.0767 m
͉vB ͉max ϭ 3.25 m/s at sB Ϫ sB0 ϭ 0.0635 m
t ϭ 3.40 s, ␪ ϭ 663Њ
˙
͉ ␪ max ͉ ϭ 1.072 rad/s at ␪ ϭ 65.6Њ, ␪min ϭ 40.8Њ
␮min ϭ 0.622 at ␪ ϭ 121.9Њ
␪ ϭ 21.7Њ
t ϭ 1.069 s, ␪ ϭ 30.6Њ
e ϭ 0.610, y ϭ 1.396 ft
vmax ϭ 1.283 m/s at ␪ ϭ 17.40Њ
t ϭ 0.408 s
vmax ϭ 5.69 ft/sec at ␪ ϭ 50.8Њ
Nmax ϭ 2.75 lb at ␪ ϭ 66.2Њ

Chapter 4
4/1

4/2
4/3

4/4

4/5
4/6
4/7
4/8
4/9
4/10
4/11
4/12
4/13
4/14

d
˙ v
r ϭ (10i ϩ 6j), r ϭ (4i ϩ 4j)
7
7
˙
¨ ϭ Fi , T ϭ 6mv2, HO ϭ 4mvdk, HO ϭ ϪFdk
r
7m
12
Fd
˙
mvdk, HG ϭ Ϫ k
HG ϭ
7
7
d
˙ ϭ v (4i ϩ 2j ϩ 6k)
r ϭ (i ϩ 4j ϩ 6k), r
7
7
Fk
¨
, T ϭ 13mv2, HO ϭ mvd(12i ϩ 6j ϩ 2k)
rϭ
7m
˙
HO ϭ ϪFdj
mvd
(72i ϩ 24j ϩ 28k)
HG ϭ
7
2Fd
˙
HG ϭ Ϫ
(2i ϩ 3j)
7
ay ϭ 5.19 m/s2
T ϭ 58.3 lb
a ϭ 4 m/s2
F
Ϫ g sin ␪
aC ϭ
2m
a ϭ 15.19 m/s2
Mass-center accelerations are identical
F ϭ 2.92 N
v ϭ 1.137gr, R ϭ 2.29mg
HO ϭ 2m(r2␻ Ϫ vy)k
HO ϭ 3.3k kg ⅐ m2/s

4/15
4/16
4/17
4/18
4/19
4/20
4/21
4/22
4/23
4/24
4/25
4/26
4/27
4/28
4/29
4/30
4/31
᭤ 4/32
᭤ 4/33

709

a ϭ 13.42 ft/sec2
4mr2␻
tϭ
M
˙
␪Ј ϭ 80.7 rad/s
t ϭ 2.72 s
vA ϭ 1.015 m/s, vB ϭ 1.556 m/s
v ϭ 0.205 m/s
v ϭ 0.355 mi/hr, n ϭ 95.0%
(m1 ϩ m2)x1 Ϫ m2l
sϭ
m0 ϩ m1 ϩ m2
x ϭ 0.316 ft, no
v ϭ 4.71 m/s (both spheres)
9mg
(a) Pmin ϭ ␲ , (b) v ϭ Ί3gr/2
⌬Q ϭ 2.52 J, Ix ϭ 12.87 N ⅐ s
F
¨ 2Fb
(a) a ϭ
, (b) ␪ ϭ
2m
mL2
v ϭ 0.877 m/s
v ϭ 72.7 km/h
m0
m0
˙ v0
v,␪ϭ
vϭ
m0 ϩ 2m 0
m0 ϩ 2m
b
˙ ϭ 2 2g
vx ϭ Ί2gl, ␪
l
v ϭ 3.92 ft/sec
⌬Q ϭ 0.571␳gr2

Ί

Ί

710

᭤ 4/34

Problem Answers

vb/c ϭ Ί(1 ϩ m1/m2)2gl(1Ϫ cos ␪)
vc ϭ

2gl(1Ϫ cos ␪)

Ί(m /m )(1 ϩ m /m )
2

1

2

4/35
4/36
4/37
4/38
4/39
4/40
4/41
4/42

F ϭ ␳Av2 sin ␪, Q1 ϭ

1

␣ ϭ 17.22Њ
F ϭ 4.56 lb
F ϭ 750 N
R ϭ 1885 N
T ϭ 2.85 kN
F ϭ 202,000 lb
T ϭ 32.6 kN
Fx ϭ Fy ϭ 442 N

4/43

Q
(1 ϩ cos ␪)
2

Q
(1Ϫ cos ␪)
2
h ϭ 18.57 ft
n ϭ 0.638
p ϭ 840 kPa
␳B
␲d2
␳B 1 Ϫ ␳ v2 ϩ (pB Ϫ pA)
Rϭ
4
A
T ϭ 6530 lb
F ϭ 4.44 lb
R ϭ 5980 lb
v ϭ 56.4 m/s, M ϭ 29.8 kN ⅐ m
p ϭ 0.1556 lb/in.2
F ϭ 2.66 lb
␲d2
u(u Ϫ v cos ␪)
R ϭ mg ϩ ␳
4
p ϭ 34.2 lb/in.2, M ϭ 461 lb-in.
T ϭ 12,610 lb, V ϭ 162.3 lb, M ϭ 1939 lb-ft
P ϭ 5.56 kN, R ϭ 8.49 kN
P ϭ 0.671 kW
m ϭ 184.3 kg
a ϭ 14.68 ft/sec2
mg mg
1 mg
v ϭ r ␲␳ , P ϭ
␲␳
2r
␪ ϭ 2.31Њ, ay ϭ 1.448 m/s2
Rx ϭ 311 lb right, Ry ϭ 539 lb down
Qr
Qr
Ϫ r2 ϩ b2 ␻ , ␻ ϭ
M ϭ ␳Q
4A
4A(r2 ϩ b2)
␪ ϭ 38.2Њ
C ϭ 100.3 lb
d ϭ 165.3 mm, D ϭ 2.55 m
u ϭ 131.0 m/s
m ϭ 10.86 Mg
an ϭ 8.31 m/s2, at ϭ 21.2 m/s2
a ϭ 4.70 m/s2, mЈ ϭ 448 kg/s
(a) P ϭ 1113 lb, (b) P ϭ 1242 lb
P ϭ 76.5 N
Q2 ϭ

4/44
4/45
4/46
4/47
4/48
4/49
4/50
4/51
4/52
4/53
4/54
4/55
4/56
4/57
4/58
4/59
4/60
4/61
4/62
4/63
4/64
4/65
᭤ 4/66
᭤ 4/67
᭤ 4/68

4/69
4/70
4/71
4/72
4/73

΄

΂

Ί

΄

Ί

΂

4/87
4/88

΃΅

Ί

(a) v1 ϭ Ί2gh ln (L/h)
(b) v2 ϭ Ί2gh[1 ϩ ln (L/h)]

΅

΃

m ϭ m0e΂ u ΃t
F ϭ ␳(xx ϩ ˙2)
¨ x
P ϭ 209 N
R ϭ ␳gx ϩ ␳v2
a ϭ 0.498 ft/sec2
P ϭ 963 lb
F ϭ ␳s 2 Ϫ ␳(L Ϫ s)s
˙
¨
P ϭ 20.4 N
a ϭ Ϫ1.603 m/s2
(a) P ϭ 6.75 N, (b) a ϭ 1.104 m/s2
v ϭ 13.83 ft/sec
P ϭ ␳v2 ϩ ␳g(h Ϫ y), R ϭ ␳g(L Ϫ h Ϫ y)
x ϭ 6.18 m
m0
2p
P
a ϭ m Ϫ␳x, v ϭ v02 ϩ ␳ ln m Ϫ ␳x, T ϭ ␳v2
0
0
Ϫa ϩ g

4/74
4/75
4/76
4/77
4/78
4/79
4/80
4/81
4/82
4/83
4/84
4/85
4/86

΂

4/89
᭤ 4/90
᭤ 4/91

΄

4/93
4/94
4/95
4/96
4/97
4/98
4/99
4/100
4/101
4/102
4/103
4/104
4/105

΄Ί

΅

΅

΄

΅

x(L Ϫ x/2)
x(L Ϫ x/2)
1
, T1 ϭ ␳g
2
LϪx
LϪx
␳gL2
g
2gx
vϭ
,aϭ ,Qϭ
3
6
3
a ϭ 53.7 ft/sec2
␻ ϭ 12.37 rad/sec
F ϭ 812 lb
m0
v ϭ u ln
Ϫ gt
m0 Ϫ mЈt
ϩ

᭤ 4/92

΃

h
(c) Q ϭ ␳gh L Ϫ
2
v0
2v t␳
m
vϭ
,xϭ ␳
1ϩ 0 Ϫ1
m
1 ϩ 2␳L/m
1
1
R ϭ ␳g(L ϩ 3x), T1 ϭ ␳gx, Q ϭ ␳gL2
2
4
x(L Ϫ x/2)
1
, R ϭ ␳g (L ϩ x)
aϭg 1ϩ
2
(L Ϫ x)2

Ί

΂

΃

¨
a ϭ 64.4 ft/sec2, ␪ ϭ 325 rad/sec2
an ϭ 4.67 m/s2, at ϭ 19.34 m/s2
a ϭ 5.64 m/s2 at t ϭ 60 s, amax ϭ 69.3 m/s2
at t ϭ 231 sec
v ϭ 13.90 ft/sec
F ϭ 159.8 lb
1
P ϭ ␳v2
4
T ϭ 21.1 kN, F ϭ 12.55 kN
F ϭ 3␳gx
R ϭ 3␳(a ϩ g)2t2
2

¨
4/106 a ϭ 2.67 m/s2, ␪ ϭ 15.40 rad/s2, a ϭ 5.33 m/s2
4/107 M ϭ 1837 lb-ft

Problem Answers

΂

΃

x
x
4/108 (a) a ϭ g , (b) T ϭ ␳gx 1 Ϫ , (c) v ϭ ΊgL
L
L
4L Ϫ 3x
᭤ 4/109 R ϭ ␳gx
2(L Ϫ x)
᭤ 4/110 C ϭ 4340 N up, D ϭ 3840 N down

΂

3
x
2
᭤ 4/112 a ϭ (h/H)g, v ϭ hΊg/H
R ϭ 2␳g[H Ϫ (2h2/H)]
᭤ 4/111 v ϭ Ίgx, R ϭ ␳g L Ϫ

711

΃

Chapter 5
5/1
5/2
5/3
5/4
5/5
5/6
5/7
5/8
5/9
5/10
5/11
5/12
5/13
5/14
5/15
5/16
5/17
5/18
5/19
5/20
5/21
5/22
5/23
5/24
5/25
5/26
5/27
5/28
5/29

vA ϭ Ϫ0.32i Ϫ 0.08j m/s2
aA ϭ 0.32i ϩ 0.76j m/s2
vA ϭ ␻(hi ϩ bj)
aA ϭ Ϫ(b␻2 ϩ h␣)i ϩ (h␻2 Ϫ b␣)j
vA ϭ 1.332i ϩ 2.19j m/s
aA ϭ Ϫ6.42i ϩ 9.16j m/s2
N ϭ 33.3 rev
˙
͉ ␪͉max ϭ ␪0␻0 at ␪ ϭ 0

¨
͉␪ ͉max ϭ ␪0␻02 at ␪ ϭ ␪0 ϭ ␪max
␻ ϭ 0.411 rad/sec, ␻av ϭ 0.344 rad/sec
v ϭ 5 m/s, a ϭ 50 m/s2
b ϭ 180.6 mm
N ϭ 300 rev
vA ϭ Ϫ1.777i ϩ 2.70j m/s
aA ϭ 16.34i ϩ 4.57j m/s2
␪ Ϫ ␪0 ϭ 10.99 rad, t ϭ 1.667 s
⌬␪ ϭ 244 rad
␪ ϭ 9 rad
˙
¨
␪ ϭ 30.4 rad/s, ␪ ϭ 346 rad/s2
2
␣ ϭ 3.95 rad/s
t ϭ 0.1784 sec
(a) ␣ ϭ 300 rad/s2, (b) aB ϭ 37.5 m/s2
(c) aC ϭ 22.5 m/s2
r ϭ 3 in.
3
␻ ϭ 2k rad/sec, ␣ ϭ Ϫ k rad/sec2
2
aC ϭ Ί2(Ϫ11i ϩ 5j) in./sec2
v ϭ Ϫ0.374i ϩ 0.1905j m/s
a ϭ Ϫ0.757i Ϫ 0.605j m/s2
v ϭ Ϫ0.223i Ϫ 0.789j m/s
a ϭ 3.02i Ϫ 1.683j m/s2
v ϭ Ϫ0.0464i ϩ 0.1403j m/s
a ϭ Ϫ0.1965i ϩ 0.246j m/s2
␪ ϭ 0.596 rad
␪ Ϫ ␪0 ϭ 250 rev, ␪ Ϫ ␪0 ϭ 187.5 rev
␻ ϭ 24.6k rad/sec
aC ϭ 149.6 m/s2
N ϭ 513 rev/min
NB ϭ 415 rev/min
vd
␻OA ϭ 2
s ϩ d2

5/30
5/31
5/32
5/33
5/34

5/35
5/36
5/37
5/38
5/39
5/40
5/41
5/42
5/43
5/44
5/45
5/46
5/47
5/48
5/49
5/50
5/52
5/53
5/54
5/55
᭤ 5/56

␻ϭ

Ί2ax

Ί4b2 Ϫ x2
t ϭ 66.7 sec
v ϭ 6.28 m/s
v ϭ Ϫr␻ sin ␪, a ϭ Ϫr␣ sin ␪ Ϫ r␻2 cos ␪
Ί3v
␻ϭ
3x 2
2L 1 Ϫ A
4L2
␻ ϭ 1.2 rad/sec, vO ϭ 3.4 ft/sec
v ϭ vOΊ2(1 ϩ sin ␪), a ϭ vO2/r toward O
aB ϭ 789 mm/s2 down
hv
␻OA ϭ Ϫ 2
h ϩ s2
␪
v ϭ 7u cot
2
2
vO ϭ 1.2 m/s, ␻ ϭ 1.333 rad/s CCW
r
␷
␻ ϭ Ϫx
Ίx2 Ϫ r2
rh␻0
␻ϭ 2
x ϩ h2
ax ϭ Ϫe␻2 sin ␪
v
␻ϭ
xΊ(x/r)2 Ϫ 1
1
v ϭ 2 vA tan ␪

Ί

2s Ίb2 ϩ L2 Ϫ 2bL cos ␪
˙
L tan ␪
4
␻ ϭ rad/sec CCW, ␣ ϭ 1 rad/sec2 CCW
3
␻ ϭ 17.95 rad/sec CW
␻ ϭ 1.056 rad/s CW, ␣ ϭ Ϫ0.500 rad/s2 CCW
␻CB ϭ 6.30 rad/s
tv2
aϭ
2␲r2
cos ␪ Ϫ 0.278
˙
␤ ϭ 6.28
rad/sec
1.939 Ϫ cos ␪
␻ ϭ 0.825 rad/sec CW
vB
␪
8 ϩ sec2
vC ϭ
2
2
␻2 ϭ 1.923 rad/s
vϭ

΂

Ί

΃

712

᭤ 5/57

Problem Answers

cos ␪
r2
1 Ϫ 2 sin2 ␪
l
r2
Ϫ1
r␻02
l2
␣AB ϭ
sin ␪
l
3/2
r2
1 Ϫ 2 sin2 ␪
l
␣ ϭ 0.1408 rad/sec2 CCW
vB ϭ Ϫ1.386i ϩ 1.2j m/s
(a) N ϭ 91.7 rev/min CCW
(b) N ϭ 45.8 rev/min CCW
(c) N ϭ 45.8 rev/min CW
vA ϭ Ϫ1672i ϩ 107 257j km/h
vB ϭ 105 585j km/h, vD ϭ 108 929j km/h
vC ϭ 1672i ϩ 107 257j km/h
vC/D ϭ 0.579 m/s
␻ ϭ 6.65 rad/sec CW
vA ϭ 0.7i ϩ 0.4j m/s, vP ϭ 0.3i m/s
vA ϭ 58.9 mm/s
␻AB ϭ 0.96 rad/s CCW
␻ ϭ 0.375 rad/s CCW
vO ϭ 0.6 m/s, vB ϭ 0.849 m/s
vA/B ϭ 23.7i Ϫ 31.0j in./sec
vO ϭ 8.49 m/s right, ␻ ϭ 26.1 rad/s CW
␻OA ϭ Ϫ3.33k rad/s
vA/B ϭ 1.2(i ϩ j) m/s, vP ϭ 1.2i ϩ 0.8j m/s
vB ϭ 4.38 m/s, ␻ ϭ 3.23 rad/s CCW
␻BC ϭ 2.77 rad/sec CCW
vP ϭ 0.900 m/s
␻AB ϭ ␻0 CW, vB ϭ 2.58r␻0 down
␻AB ϭ 0.966␻0 CCW, vB ϭ Ί2r␻0
60Њ
␻AC ϭ 0.295 rad/sec CCW
␻BC ϭ 3 rad/sec CW
vA ϭ 9.04 in./sec, vC ϭ 6.99 in./sec
␻ ϭ 1.394 rad/s CCW, vA ϭ 0.408 m/s down
␻ ϭ 11.55 rad/s CW, vG ϭ 1.155 m/s
␻ ϭ 8.59 rad/s CCW
␻AB ϭ 19.38 rad/sec CW
vD ϭ 9 m/s
vC ϭ 6.24 ft/sec
␻2 ϭ 1.923 rad/s CCW
␻AB ϭ 1.725 rad/s CCW, ␻BC ϭ 4 rad/s CCW
␻CA ϭ 0.429k rad/s
vB ϭ 3.97 m/s
0.5 m above G, vA ϭ vB ϭ 2.33 m/s
0.5 m below G, vA ϭ 1.949 m/s, vB ϭ 2.66 m/s
␻OB ϭ 8.59 rad/s CCW
0.15 m below P, vP ϭ 0.3 m/s, vA ϭ 0.806 m/s
vG ϭ 277 mm/s
(a) vA ϭ Ϫ20j in./sec, vB ϭ 40j in./sec
(b) vA ϭ 15j in./sec, vB ϭ 75j in./sec
␻AB ϭ

r␻0
l

Ί

΂

᭤ 5/58

5/59
5/60

5/61

5/62
5/63
5/64
5/65
5/66
5/67
5/68
5/69
5/70
5/71
5/72
5/73
5/74
5/75
5/76
5/77
5/78
5/79
5/80
5/81
5/82
5/83
5/84
5/85
5/86
5/87
5/88
5/89
᭤ 5/90
5/91
5/92
5/93
5/94
5/95
5/96

΃

5/97
5/98

vA ϭ 0.408 m/s down
v
(a) ␻l ϭ v CW, (b) ␻u ϭ r CCW
r
(c) vA ϭ v, vB ϭ 2v, vC ϭ v (all right)
vD ϭ vP ϭ 0

5/99
5/100
5/101
5/102
5/103
5/104
5/105
5/106
5/107
5/108
5/109
5/110
5/111
5/112
5/113
5/114
5/115
5/116
5/117
᭤ 5/118
᭤ 5/119
᭤ 5/120
5/121
5/122
5/123
5/124
5/125
5/126
5/127
5/128
5/129
5/130
5/131
5/132
5/133
5/134
5/135
5/136
5/137
5/138

vA ϭ 9.04 in./sec, vC ϭ 6.99 in./sec
vA ϭ 0.707 m/s, vP ϭ 1.581 m/s
␻BD ϭ 1.2 rad/s CCW, ␻AD ϭ 1.333 rad/s CCW
vB ϭ 0.884 m/s, ␻ ϭ 3.20 rad/s CCW
␻BC ϭ 2.77 rad/sec CCW
␻AB ϭ ␻ CW, vB ϭ 2.58r␻ down
␻AB ϭ 0.966␻ CCW, vB ϭ 1.414r␻
60Њ
vE ϭ 0.1386 m/s, ␻B ϭ 0.289 rad/s CW
␻ ϭ 15 rad/s CW, vP ϭ 1.897 m/s
vD ϭ 2.31 m/s, ␻ ϭ 13.33 rad/s CW
v ϭ 10.71 mi/hr, vs ϭ 6.98 ft/sec
␻CA ϭ 0.429k rad/s
vB
␪
2
vC ϭ
ϩ8
2 sec 2
␻AB ϭ 1.414 rad/sec CCW, ␻BD ϭ 3.77 rad/sec CW
␻AB ϭ 19.38 rad/sec CW
vD ϭ 4.50 m/s, ␻ ϭ 7.47 rad/s CCW
␻AD ϭ 12.5 rad/s CCW, ␻BD ϭ 7.5 rad/s CCW
vA ϭ 0.278 m/s
vA ϭ 5.95 m/s
␻ ϭ 1.10 rad/sec CW
␻ ϭ 10.73 rad/s CW
(a) ␻B ϭ 360 rev/min, (b) ␻B ϭ 600 rev/min
aA ϭ 9.58 m/s2, aB ϭ 9.09 m/s2
(a) ␣ ϭ 0.0833 rad/sec2 CCW
(b) aC ϭ 0.625 ft/sec2 up, (c) d ϭ 1.5 ft
(a) aA ϭ 0.2 m/s2, (b) aA ϭ 4.39 m/s2
(c) aA ϭ 6.2 m/s2
aA ϭ 5 m/s2
R
r
4
2
2
␪ ϭ sinϪ1 , vO ϭ
r aO Ί R Ϫ r
R
vO ϭ Ϫ0.6i m/s, aO ϭ Ϫ1.8i m/s2
␣ ϭ 0.286 rad/s2 CCW, aA ϭ 0.653 m/s2 down
aB ϭ 0.0279i m/s2
aA ϭ 26.6 m/s2
v ϭ 3.67 mi/hr
␣AB ϭ ␻2
␣AB ϭ Ϫ4k rad/s2, aA ϭ 1.6i m/s2
(aB)t ϭ 2.46 m/s2 left
aC ϭ Ϫ0.267i ϩ 3j ft/sec2
aD ϭ Ϫ2i ϩ 0.733j ft/sec2, aL ϭ j ft/sec2
␣AB ϭ 3.64␻02 CCW, aB ϭ 6.82r␻02 up
␣ ϭ 2l␻2/r CW
aA ϭ Ϫ24i Ϫ 270j ft/sec2
aD ϭ Ϫ265i ϩ 73.6j ft/sec2
␣OA ϭ 396 rad/s2 CCW

Ί

Ί

Problem Answers

5/139 ␣ ϭ 8.00 rad/s2 CW, (aB)t ϭ 8.90 m/s2
105Њ
5/140 (aB)t ϭ Ϫ23.9 m/s2, ␣ ϭ 36.2 rad/s2 CW
5/141 aA ϭ 8.33i Ϫ 10j m/s2, aP ϭ Ϫ8.33i m/s2
aB ϭ Ϫ13.89i ϩ 3.33j m/s2
5/142 ␣AB ϭ 2␻2, ␣BC ϭ 0
5/143 ␣BC ϭ 2.08 rad/sec2 CCW
vA2
5/144 ␣OB ϭ
rl
5/145 ␣CB ϭ 5.76 rad/sec2 CW
5/146 aP ϭ 3.62 m/s2
5/147 ␣AB ϭ 16.02 rad/s2 CW, ␣BC ϭ 13.31 rad/s2 CCW
5/148 ␣ ϭ 0.0986 rad/s2 CW
5/149 aA/B ϭ 0.711j ft/sec2
5/150 ␣OA ϭ 0, aD ϭ Ϫ480i Ϫ 360j m/s2
5/151 ␣AB ϭ 36.6 rad/s2 CCW, aB ϭ 1.984 m/s2
345Њ
5/152 ␣AB ϭ 1.688 rad/s2 CCW
5/153 aA ϭ 4.89 m/s2 right, ␣AB ϭ 0.467 rad/s2 CCW
5/154 ␣BD ϭ 46.9 rad/s2 CW
᭤ 5/155 aD ϭ 0.568 m/s2 down
᭤ 5/156 aE ϭ 0.285 m/s2 right
5/157 vA ϭ 0.1i ϩ 0.25j m/s, ␤ ϭ 68.2Њ
5/158 aCor ϭ 0.4j m/s2, aA ϭ Ϫ0.35i ϩ 0.3j m/s2
␥ ϭ 139.4Њ
5/159 vA ϭ Ϫ3.33i Ϫ 4.5j ft/sec
aA ϭ 34.5i Ϫ 12.67j ft/sec2
5/160 vA ϭ 4.38i ϩ 7.58j ft/sec
aA ϭ 48.7i Ϫ 38.2j ft/sec2
5/161 aA ϭ 10.06 ft/sec2
5/162 vA ϭ Ϫ3.4i m/s, aA ϭ 2i Ϫ 0.667j m/s2
5/163 (a) aCor ϭ 0, (b) aCor ϭ 0.0203 m/s2
5/164 vrel ϭ Ϫ⍀dj, no
5/165 aCor ϭ Ϫ2␻ui
5/166 (a) aA/B ϭ Ϫ1.76i ϩ 0.70j ft/sec2
(b) aA ϭ Ϫ10.42i ϩ 5.70j ft/sec2
5/167 aA ϭ Ϫ10.42er ϩ 5.70e␪ ft/sec2
5/168 arel ϭ Ϫ4.69k m/s2
5/169 ␻BC ϭ 0.634 rad/s CCW, vrel ϭ 0.483 m/s
120Њ
5/170 ␦ ϭ 0.1350 in.
5/171 vrel ϭ Ϫ2.71i Ϫ 0.259j m/s
arel ϭ 0.864i ϩ 0.0642j m/s2
5/172 vrel ϭ Ϫ1.136i Ϫ 0.537j m/s
arel ϭ 0.854i Ϫ 0.00918j m/s2
5/173 arel ϭ ␻Ίr2␻2 ϩ 4u2
5/176 ␻ ϭ 4 rad/s CW, ␣ ϭ 64.0 rad/s2 CCW
5/177 vrel ϭ Ϫ22.3i Ϫ 65.7j ft/sec
arel ϭ Ϫ16.06i ϩ 27.0j ft/sec2
5/178 vrel ϭ 3.93 m/s and arel ϭ 15.22 m/s2
19.11Њ
␻BC ϭ 1.429 rad/s CCW
␣BC ϭ 170.0 rad/s2 CW
5/179 vrel ϭ 7.71 m/s and arel ϭ 15.66 m/s2
19.11Њ
␻BC ϭ 1.046 rad/s CW, ␣BC ϭ 119.0 rad/s2 CW

713

5/180 (a) vrel ϭ 5250i Ϫ 5190j km/h
(b) vrel ϭ 7380i km/h
5/181 a ϭ 156.5 ft/sec2
5/182 ␻ ϭ 5 rad/s CW, arel ϭ Ϫ8660i mm/s2
5/183 ␣2 ϭ 16.53 rad/s2 CCW
᭤ 5/184 vrel ϭ Ϫ26 220i km/h, arel ϭ Ϫ8.02j m/s2
k
1
5/185 t ϭ
tanϪ1 ␻0
K
ΊKk

΂ Ί΃

5/186 vP ϭ 4.27 ft/sec
5/187 ␣ ϭ 0.75 rad/s2 CCW
2
␻0
␻0
5/188 ␻ ϭ
,␣ϭ
tan ␪
1 Ϫ ␻0t tan ␪
1 Ϫ ␻0t tan ␪
5/189 ␪ ϭ 60Њ
5/190 ␻AB ϭ 1.203 rad/s CCW
5/191 aC ϭ 83.1 ft/sec2 up
5/192 vA ϭ 1249i Ϫ189.1k ft/sec
vB ϭ 176i ϩ 1089j ft/sec
5/193 ␻AB ϭ 0.354 rad/sec CW, vO ϭ 7.88 in./sec
5/194 aB ϭ 5.25 in./sec2 left
5/195 ␻BC ϭ 2 rad/s CW
5/196 (a) aA ϭ 8.08 ft/sec2, (b) aA ϭ 17.44 ft/sec2
0.966vd
᭤ 5/197 ␻OA ϭ 2
s ϩ d2 ϩ 0.518sd
5/198 vB ϭ 288 mm/s
v sin 2␪
v cos ␪
5/199 ␻ ϭ r , ␻AC ϭ
D Ϫ r cos ␪
5/200 ␣DE ϭ 2.45 rad/s2 CCW
5/201 ␻DB ϭ 3.24 rad/s CW
5/202 ␣DB ϭ 41.2 rad/s2 CW
5/203 ⌬vrel ϭ Ϫ50.3i ϩ 87.1j km/h
᭤ 5/204 ␣ ϭ 6.25 rad/s2 CW
* 5/205 (vrel)min ϭ Ϫ2 m/s at ␪ ϭ 109.5Њ, (vrel)max ϭ 2 m/s
at ␪ ϭ 251Њ
* 5/206 ␪ ϭ 46.1Њ
* 5/207 ͉␻AB ͉max ϭ 6.54 rad/s at ␪ ϭ 202Њ
͉␻BC ͉max ϭ 7.47 rad/s at ␪ ϭ 215Њ
* 5/208 ͉␣AB ͉max ϭ 88.6 rad/s2 at ␪ ϭ 234Њ
͉␣BC ͉max ϭ 112.2 rad/s2 at ␪ ϭ 182.1Њ
* 5/209 ͉␻AB ͉max ϭ 10.15 rad/s at ␪ ϭ 203Њ
͉␻BC ͉max ϭ 11.83 rad/s at ␪ ϭ 216Њ
2 cos (␪ ϩ ␤)
* 5/210 ␻2 ϭ
Ί2 cos ␤ Ϫ cos (␪ ϩ ␤)
˙ ˙ 2 cos ␪ Ϫ 1
* 5/211 ␤ / ␪ ϭ
5 – 4 cos ␪
cos ␪
* 5/212 vA ϭ r␻ sin ␪ 1 ϩ
Ί(l/r)2 Ϫ sin 2␪

΂

΂

(vA)max ϭ 69.6 ft/sec at ␪ ϭ 72.3Њ
* 5/213 ␪ ϭ 72.3Њ

΃

΃

714

Problem Answers

Chapter 6
6/1
6/2
6/3
6/4
6/5
6/6
6/7
6/8
6/9
6/10
6/11
6/12
6/13
6/14
6/15
6/16
6/17
6/18
6/19
6/20
6/21
6/22
6/23
6/24
6/25
6/26
6/27
6/28

a ϭ gΊ3
a ϭ 3g
B ϭ 1.5 lb
P ϭ ␮k(M ϩ m)g cos ␪
a ϭ 0.268g
d ϭ ␮kh/2
c
(a) and (b) P ϭ mg
b
P ϭ Ί3(M ϩ m)g
a ϭ 1.306 m/s2 right
a ϭ 0.706 m/s2 right
F ϭ 1110 N, Ox ϭ 45 N right, Oy ϭ 667 N down
A
a ϭ 4.14 m/s2
T ϭ 27.3 N, Ax ϭ 18.34 N right, Ay ϭ 15.57 N up
(a) NA ϭ 1280 lb (40%), NB ϭ 1920 lb (60%)
(b) NA ϭ 1908 lb (59.6%), NB ϭ 1292 lb (40.4%)
(a) NA ϭ 1920 lb (60%), NB ϭ 1280 lb (40%)
(b) NA ϭ 2550 lb (79.6%), NB ϭ 652 lb (20.4%)
A ϭ 1192 N
Ay ϭ 1389 N down
a ϭ 161 ft/sec2
TA ϭ 12.99 lb, TB ϭ 39.0 lb, ␣ ϭ 8.05 rad/sec2
P ϭ 118.7 lb, ␪ ϭ 49.2Њ
B ϭ 410 lb, Bst ϭ 417 lb
t ϭ 3.41 s
M ϭ 196.0 N ⅐ m CCW
F ϭ 78.3 N, M ϭ 28.7 N ⅐ m
␮ ϭ 0.598
D ϭ 234 N, ␣ ϭ 5.87 rad/s2 CW
N ϭ 257 kN
5
(a) ␪ ϭ 51.3Њ, (b) ␪ ϭ 24.8Њ, a ϭ g
4
v2
(a) ␪ ϭ tanϪ1 gr
(b) Slips ﬁrst if ␮ Ͻ

b
and ␮ ϭ tan ␤
2h

␮ ϩ tan ␪
1 Ϫ ␮ tan ␪
b
b
Tips ﬁrst if ␮ Ͼ
and tan ␤ ϭ
2h
2h
b
ϩ tan ␪
2h
2
v ϭ gr
b
1Ϫ
tan ␪
2h
(a) D ϭ 1714 N, (b) D ϭ 2178 N
␪ ϭ 0.964Њ (nose up)
B ϭ 188.3 N
A ϭ 2.02 kN
R ϭ 49.0 N

6/34
6/35
6/36
6/37
6/38

6/39
6/40
6/41

΂

6/42
6/43
6/44
6/45
6/46
6/47
6/48
6/49
6/50
6/51
6/52
6/53
6/54

v2 ϭ gr

6/29
6/30
6/31
᭤ 6/32
6/33

FA ϭ FB ϭ 24.5 N
␣ ϭ 1.193 rad/s2 CCW, FA ϭ 769 N
IO ϭ 1453 lb-ft-sec2
␣ ϭ 9.12 rad/sec2 CW
g
(a) ␣ ϭ
CW, O ϭ mg/2
2r
2g
(b) ␣ ϭ
CW, O ϭ mg/3
3r
R ϭ 3.57 lb
A ϭ 56.3 N
8g
32mg
␣ϭ
CW, Ox ϭ
left
3␲b
9␲2
32
Oy ϭ 1 Ϫ
mg up
9␲2
8g
8g
CW; ␤ ϭ ␲: ␣ ϭ
CW
␤ ϭ ␲/2: ␣ ϭ
3b␲
3b␲
3Ί2g
3Ί2g
AϪA: ␣ ϭ
; BϪB: ␣ ϭ
5b
7b
15 g
CW
␣ϭ
47 r
g
␣ ϭ 0.389 CW
b
␻␳d 1 4
1
Mϭ ␶
␲r ϩ 4lt l2 ϩ rl ϩ r2
2
3
mg
cos ␪
On ϭ 2mg sin ␪, Ot ϭ Ϫ
2
2 CCW
(a) ␣ ϭ 7.85 rad/s
(b) ␣ ϭ 6.28 rad/s2 CCW
R ϭ 18 lb
(a) ␣ ϭ 8.46 rad/s2 CCW
(b) ␣ ϭ 11.16 rad/s2 CCW
Ot ϭ 8.66 lb at all times
Mƒ ϭ 0.1045 lb-ft, Mmot ϭ 0.836 lb-ft
2Ί2mr
M ϭ mr2␣, R ϭ ␲ Ί␣2 ϩ ␻4
gΊ3
l
xϭ
,␣ϭ
CW
l
2Ί3
3g
CW
x ϭ b/Ί6, ␣ ϭ
2b
6 g 12 k
(Ί5 ϪΊ3) CW
Ϫ
␣ϭ
7 l
7 m
t ϭ 78.6 s
1
O ϭ mgΊcos2 ␪ ϩ 100 sin2 ␪
4
g
CCW, A ϭ 0.593mg
␣ϭ
2r
b ϭ 40.7 mm, R ϭ 167.8 N
A ϭ 22.1 N, B ϭ 11.03 N
FA ϭ 108.3 N, FB ϭ 141.6 N

6/55
6/56
6/57
6/58
6/59
6/60
6/61
6/62

΃

΄

΂

Ί

΃΅

Problem Answers

6/63
6/64
6/65
6/66
6/67
6/68
6/69
᭤ 6/70
6/71
6/72
6/73
6/74
6/75
6/76
6/77
6/78
6/79
6/80
6/81
6/82

6/83
6/84
6/85
6/86
6/87
6/88
6/89

6/90
6/91
6/92
6/93
6/94
6/95
6/96

␣B ϭ 25.5 rad/s2 CCW
T ϭ 987 N, A ϭ 1.007 kN
␣ ϭ 3.84 rad/sec2 CW, t ϭ 34.9 sec
Ί10
(a) F ϭ ml␣/6, (b) A ϭ
ml␣
6
(c) ␻ ϭ Ί␣/3
(a) MA ϭ 109.8 N ⅐ m CCW
(b) MB ϭ 5.51 N ⅐ m CCW
R ϭ 101.3 N
(a) ␮s ϭ 0.1880, (b) ␪ ϭ 53.1Њ
(a) ␮s ϭ 0.229, (b) ␪ ϭ 54.6Њ
P
(Ϫ3i Ϫ j)
aB ϭ
2m
P
(37i ϩ 9j)
aA ϭ
10m
␣ ϭ 48.8 rad/s2 CW, aG ϭ 5j m/s2
␣ ϭ 8.61 rad/s2 CCW, aG ϭ 5j m/s2
␣ ϭ 0.310 rad/s2, ax ϭ 6.87 m/s2, ay ϭ 2.74 m/s2
aO ϭ 7.02 m/s2, ␣ ϭ 9.08 rad/s2 CCW
(␮s)min ϭ 0.775
a ϭ 13.80 ft/sec2, F ϭ 1.714 lb
a ϭ 13.31 ft/sec2, F ϭ 0.693 lb
aO ϭ 2.41 m/s2 up incline, ␣ ϭ 93.8 rad/s2 CW
1
␻ ϭ Ί2ar
kO
g
A: ␣A ϭ r sin ␪, ␮s ϭ 0
g
sin ␪, ␮s ϭ 1 tan ␪
B: ␣B ϭ
2
2r
3
13
F ϭ 8mg, N ϭ 16mg
T ϭ 20.8 N
2Ί3
mg
Tϭ
13
r2␻2
Nϭm gϩ
RϪr
␣ ϭ 22.8 rad/s2 CW, ␮s ϭ 0.275
␣ ϭ 2.12 rad/s2 CW, a ϭ 0.425 m/s2 right
F ϭ 19.38 N
␣ ϭ 0.295 rad/s2 CCW, a ϭ 1.027 m/s2 right
F ϭ 17.62 N
3mg(b2 ϩ h2)
12bg
CW, TA ϭ
up
␣ϭ 2
2
7b ϩ 3h
7b2 ϩ 3h2
BC ϭ 4.03 N (tension)
B ϭ 36.4 N
aO ϭ 3.73 m/s2 down incline
MB ϭ 3.55 N ⅐ m CCW
aA ϭ 1.143g down incline
10
5a
CW, ␻ ϭ
Ίg(1 Ϫ cos ␪) ϩ a sin ␪
␣ϭ
7r
7r

΂

΃

Ί

aA ϭ 5.93 m/s2 left
84 a
6/98 ␣ ϭ
CCW
65 L
6/99 ␻ ϭ 2.97 rad/sec CCW
14
6/100 aA ϭ
g down incline
109
6/101 s ϭ 18.66 ft
r
¨
6/102 ␪ ϭ 2 (a cos ␪ Ϫ g sin ␪)
kO

715

6/97

΂

΄΂g cos ␪ ϩ a sin ␪΃΂

On ϭ m

΃

r2
kO2
2r2
r2
1 ϩ 2 Ϫ 2g 2
kO
kO

Ot ϭ m(g sin ␪ Ϫ a cos ␪) 1 Ϫ

΃

␪max ϭ 53.1Њ
6/103 v ϭ 11.73 m/s
6g sin ␪
mg
6/104 N ϭ
,␣ϭ
CW
2
1 ϩ 3 sin ␪
L(1 ϩ 3 sin2 ␪)
6/105 A ϭ 347 lb
g
6/106 (a) m Ͼ 3.50M, (b) ␣ ϭ 0.00581 r CCW
᭤ 6/107
᭤ 6/108

6/109
6/110
6/111
6/112
6/113
6/114
6/115

(␮s)min ϭ 0.589
3g
CW
␣ϭ
2l
␣ ϭ 18.18 rad/sec2 CCW, RA ϭ 1.128 lb right
RB ϭ 0.359 lb
255Њ, aA ϭ 65.0 ft/sec2 down
2 down incline
aB ϭ 56.9 ft/sec
24g
3
gL
␻ϭ
CW, vG ϭ
14
7L
48g
␻ϭ
7L
v ϭ 2.97 ft/sec
g
␻ ϭ 0.839 CW
b
v ϭ 3.01 m/s
␪ ϭ 33.2Њ
O ϭ 91 mg up
27

Ί
Ί

Ί

A: vA ϭ Ί2gx sin ␪, B: vB ϭ Ίgx sin ␪
h ϭ 54.5 mm
␻ ϭ 13.19 rad/s
N ϭ 3240 rev/min
k ϭ 92.6 N/m, ␻ ϭ 2.42 rad/s CW
l0 ϭ 90.0 mm
␻ ϭ 3.31 rad/s
M ϭ 28.4 lb-in. CW
␪
6/124 v ϭ 6gb sin 2
6/116
6/117
6/118
6/119
6/120
6/121
6/122
6/123

6/125
6/126
6/127
6/128

Ί

␻ ϭ 4.59 rad/s
vA ϭ 2.45 m/s
⌬E ϭ 0.435 ft-lb
N ϭ 346 lb

΅

716

Problem Answers

6/129 (a) m ϭ 1.196 kg, (b) ␻ ϭ 4.36 rad/s CW
6/130 ␻ ϭ 2.23 rad/s CW
␪
c ϩ 2b
6/131 v ϭ 12gb
cos
2
3c ϩ 4b

Ί

␦ ϭ 2.11Њ, motor shaft turns CW
␻ ϭ 2.36 rad/s
k ϭ 24.0 lb/in.
␻ ϭ 9.51 rad/s
(a) k ϭ 93.3 N/m, (b) ␻ ϭ 1.484 rad/s CW
3 ϩ 9␲ g
6/137 (a) ␻ ϭ 2
8 ϩ 57␲ r
3 ϩ 9␲ g
(b) ␻ ϭ
2 ϩ 15␲ r

6/132
6/133
6/134
6/135
6/136

6/138
6/139
6/140
6/141
6/142
6/143
6/144
6/145
6/146

Ί
Ί

P ϭ (mg sin ␪ Ϫ M0 /r)v
v ϭ 2.29 m/s
␻ ϭ 3.11 rad/sec
N ϭ 3720 rev/min
3g
(2Ί2 Ϫ 1)
␻ϭ
2b
v ϭ 8.02 ft/sec
vA ϭ Ί3gl
vmax ϭ 1.325 m/s
v ϭ 5.95 m/s

6/147 ␣ ϭ

΂

b(m ϩ m0)

΂

6/148

6/149
6/150
6/151
6/152
6/153
6/154
6/155
6/156
6/157
6/158
6/159
6/160

΃

΃

΂

΃

΃

6/167
6/168
6/169
6/170
6/171

6/174

␣ ϭ 10.54 rad/sec2 CCW
M ϭ 0, MB ϭ 11.44 kN ⅐ m CW
␣ ϭ 27.3 rad/s2 CW
a ϭ 0.341 m/s2 down incline
(a) HO ϭ 0.587 kg ⅐ m2/s CW
(b) HO ϭ 0.373 kg ⅐ m2/s CW
(a) ␻ ϭ 119.0 rad/s CW
(b) ␻ ϭ 72 rad/s CCW
␻ ϭ 1.093 rad/s
v ϭ 0.379 m/s up, ␻ ϭ 56.0 rad/s CW
H ϭ 2.66(1040) kg ⅐ m2/s
␻ ϭ 23.4 rad/sec CW
I
tϭ
␻0k
␻ ϭ 1.202 rad/sec CW
(a) ␻2 ϭ 1.166 rad/sec CW
(b) ␻2 ϭ 1.220 rad/sec CW
M
m
vx ϭ
v ,v ϭ
v
Mϩm M y Mϩm m
12vm
m
␻ϭ
CCW
L
4M ϩ 7m

΂

6/175 t ϭ

CCW

m
ϩ m0 g cos ␪; otherwise ␣ ϭ 0
if P Ͼ
2
M
␣ϭ
CW
1
mb2 cos2 ␪ ϩ
3
3g cos ␪
␣ϭ
2b
␪ ϭ 7.08Њ
␣ ϭ 33.7 rad/sec2 CW
␪
2P
tan Ϫ g
aϭ
5m
2
M
Ϫg
aϭ
2mbΊ1 Ϫ (h /2b)2
␣ ϭ [M Ϫ mg(b cos ␪ Ϫ a sin ␪)] /IA CCW
␪ ϭ 64.3Њ
P(2 cos2 ␪ ϩ 1)
CW
␣ϭ
mb(8 cos2 ␪ ϩ 1)
F
aϭ
Ϫg
2m
3g
3 P
Ϫ
aϭ
8 m
2
N ϭ 133.0 rev/min
␣ ϭ 135.3 rad/s2 CCW

΂

6/166

6/172
6/173

Ί

m
PϪ
ϩ m0 g cos ␪
2

6/161
6/162
6/163
6/164
6/165

6/178

6/179
6/180
6/181
6/182
6/183
6/184
6/185
6/186
6/187

6/188

΂ ΃

m1
r␻
2m1 ϩ m2 ␮kg

΂ ΃

m1
r␻
2m1 ϩ m2 ␮kg
3mv1
M
␻2 ϭ
CW, Ox⌬t ϭ
mv1 right
(M ϩ m)L
2(M ϩ m)
72 v1
18
v right
CW, (vG)x ϭ
␻2 ϭ
59 b
59 1
27
v down
(vG)y ϭ
59 1
N2 ϭ 2.04 rev/s
v1
(␻2)max ϭ 1.718 CW, x ϭ 0.291L
L
␮k ϭ 0.204, v ϭ 3 m/s
T ϭ 0.750 ϩ 0.01719t N
RA ϭ 27.2 lb, RB ϭ 18.77 lb, both up
v1 ϭ 4.88 m/s
N2 ϭ 2.59 rev/min
2[(It ϩ Id)⍀1 ϩ Id␻]
⍀2 ϭ
2It ϩ Id
(a) ␻2 ϭ 6.57 rad/s, (b) and
(c) ␻3 ϭ 1.757 rad/s
2v0
5v0␮k
tϭ
,vϭ
7␮k Ϫ 2 tan ␪
g(7␮k cos ␪ Ϫ 2 sin ␪)

6/176 t ϭ
6/177

΃

␻ϭ

5v0␮k/r
7␮k Ϫ 2 tan ␪

Problem Answers

6/189 t ϭ

2r␻0

2r␻0(sin ␪ ϩ ␮k cos ␪)

␻ϭ

(2 sin ␪ ϩ 7␮k cos ␪)
2␻0(sin ␪ ϩ ␮k cos ␪)

(2 sin ␪ ϩ 7␮k cos ␪)
6/190 N ϭ 4.78 rev/sec
Mt
I
Mt
6/191 (a) ␻s ϭ Ϫ
,␻ ϭ
(I Ϫ Iw) w/s Iw (I Ϫ Iw)
6/192 ␻ ϭ 0.974 rad/sec
6/193 I ϭ 3.45 kg ⅐ m2
6/194 N ϭ 63.8 rev/min
6/195 ␻ ϭ 109.6 rev/min, ͉⌬E ͉ ϭ 1.298 J
9v2
6/196 vЈ ϭ
sin2 ␪ ϩ 3gL cos ␪
4

Ί

6/197 ␻ ϭ 0.308 rad/s CCW
v
6/198 vЈ ϭ (1 ϩ 2 cos ␪), n ϭ 0.0202
3
r
6/199 v ϭ 2
Ί2gh(k2 ϩ r2)
k ϩ r2 Ϫ rh
6/200 ⍀ ϭ 1.135 rad/s
mg
1
6/201 hmin ϭ
bϪ
(c ϩ ␮b)
2
P
hmax

3bΊ2gh
, n ϭ 62.5%
2(b2 ϩ c2)
6/208 ␮s ϭ 2 tan ␪
5
6/209 ␻ ϭ 4.15 rad/s CCW
6/210 (a) FO ϭ 6.68 lb, (b) FO ϭ 76.6 lb
6/211 M ϭ 2mrr ␻
˙
6/212 B ϭ 2130 lb
6/213 t ϭ 1206 s
6/214 (a) ␻ ϭ 4.94 rad/s CW
(b) ␻ ϭ 6.25 rad/s CW
6/215 ␤ ϭ 19.26Њ
L
6/216 b ϭ
1 ϩ Ίn
6/207 ␻ ϭ

g(2 sin ␪ ϩ 7␮k cos ␪)

vϭ

΄
΅
mg
1
ϭ ΄b ϩ
(c Ϫ ␮b)΅
2
P

6/217 ˙ ϭ r␻0
r
6/218
᭤ 6/219
᭤ 6/220

* 6/221
* 6/222
* 6/223
* 6/224
* 6/225
* 6/226

6/202 ␣ ϭ 0.604 rad/s2 CCW

6/203 N ϭ 504 rev/min, ͉⌬E ͉ ϭ 98.1 J
6/204 a ϭ 2.22 m/s2 right
l
΄m ϩ m ΂2 ϩ 12r ΃΅ CW
2
d␪
l
6/206 t ϭ
Ί3g ͵ Ίcos ␪ Ϫ cos ␤
2

6/205 HO ϭ vr

0

717

* 6/227
* 6/228
* 6/229

2

␤

* 6/230

ΊI

IO

ϩ mr2
Mx ϭ Ϫ46.0 lb-in., My ϭ 16.11 lb-in.
Mz ϭ Ϫ18.41 lb-in.
x ϭ l/3
␻2 ϭ 2.50 rad/s CW
␻max ϭ 2.35 rad/s CW at ␪ ϭ 18.88Њ
v1 ϭ 15.58Ί1 Ϫ cos (45Њ Ϫ ␣) ft/sec
(vA)max ϭ 7.57 ft/sec at ␪ ϭ 48.2Њ
␪ ϭ 12.17Њ
˙
␪max ϭ 23.0Њ, ␪max ϭ 0.389 rad/s
3mg
sin ␪ (3 cos ␪ Ϫ 2)
Ox ϭ
4
mg
(3 cos ␪ Ϫ 1)2
Oy ϭ
4
␪max ϭ 39.9Њ, ␻ ϭ 4.50 rad/s CW
␻max ϭ 0.680 rad/s at ␪ ϭ 22.4Њ, ␪max ϭ 45.9Њ
␻min ϭ 0.910 rad/s at ␪ ϭ 74.0Њ
␻ ϭ 1.586 rad/s at ␪ ϭ 90Њ
t ϭ 2.85 sec, vA ϭ 75.7 ft/sec
O

0

Chapter 7
7/1
7/2
7/3
7/4
7/5
7/7
7/8

Finite rotations cannot be added as proper
vectors
Inﬁnitesimal rotations add as proper vectors
vz ϭ Ϫ6 ft/sec, R ϭ 2.81 in.
aP ϭ 11,080 in. /sec2
aB ϭ 1285 m/s2
vA ϭ Ϫ0.8i Ϫ 1.5j ϩ 2k m/s
vB ϭ 2.62 m/s
N2 ϭ 440 rev/min
v ϭ ␻[Ϫl cos ␪ i ϩ (d cos ␪ Ϫ h sin ␪)j Ϫ l sin ␪ k]
a ϭ ␻2[(h sin ␪ cos ␪ Ϫ d cos2 ␪)i Ϫ lj
ϩ (h sin2 ␪ Ϫ d cos ␪ sin ␪)k]

7/9
7/10
7/11

␻ ϭ pj ϩ ␻0k, ␣ ϭ Ϫp␻0 i
␣ ϭ Ϫ1.2i rad/sec2, aP ϭ 35.8j Ϫ 80k in./sec2
␣ ϭ 12␲2 j rad/sec2, v ϭ 5␲(Ϫ4i ϩ 6j
Ϫ 3k) in./sec, a ϭ Ϫ5␲2(25j ϩ 18k) in./sec2

7/12

␣ ϭ 50␲

7/13
7/14
7/15
7/16
7/17

(a) ␻ ϭ 26.5 rad/s, (b) ␻ ϭ 17.32 rad/s
␻ ϭ Ϫ0.4i ϩ 2.69k rad/s, ␣ ϭ 0.8j rad/s2
␣ ϭ Ϫ1.5i ϩ 0.8j ϩ 2.60k rad/s2
␻ ϭ 2.5 rad/s, ␣ ϭ 3j rad/s2
␻ ϭ 0.693j ϩ 2.40k rad/s
␣ ϭ Ϫ1.386i rad/s2

␲
΂2Ί3 i ϩ k΃ rad/sec

2

718

Problem Answers

7/18

2␲
␣ϭϪ ␶

7/19

2

΂ ΃ R΄΂

2␲
aϭϪ ␶
7/20
7/21
7/22

7/23
7/24
7/25
᭤ 7/26
᭤ 7/27
᭤ 7/28

7/29
7/30
7/31
7/32
7/33
7/34
7/35
7/36
7/37
7/38
7/39
7/40
7/41
7/42
7/43
7/44
7/45

7/46
7/47

7/48

΂ ΃ Ri
r
2␲R
r
v ϭ ␶ ΂i Ϫ j Ϫ k΃
R
2

7/49

΃

v ϭ 3.95 m/s, a ϭ 72.2 m/s2
v ϭ 3.48 m/s, a ϭ 1.104 m/s2

΂

᭤ 7/50

΅

r
R
r ϩR iϩk

᭤ 7/51
᭤ 7/52

΃

2␲
2␲3
jϩk ,␣ϭ
i
3
3
3
8␲
(b) ␻ ϭ ␲k, ␣ ϭ
j
3
v ϭ 0.691j ϩ 1.448k m/s
a ϭ Ϫ11.70i m/s2
(a) ␣ ϭ 6j Ϫ 8k rad/s2, aA ϭ 21.2 m/s2
(b) ␣ ϭ 8i rad/s2, aA ϭ 10.67 m/s2
␻ ϭ Ϫ0.785i Ϫ 2.60j ϩ 2.5k rad/s
␣ ϭ 11.44 rad/s2
␣ ϭ 6.32 rad/s2
v ϭ Ϫ14.35j in./sec, a ϭ 338i ϩ 194.8k in./sec2
␣ ϭ Ϫ31.0j rad/sec2
1
1
␷2 r
h
ϩ 2 i, ␣ ϭ Ϫ 2
ϩr j
␻ϭ␷
2
r
h
h h
p ϭ 28.2 rad/s, vB/A ϭ 4.10i m/s
␣ ϭ pqj
␻ ϭ 10.77 rad/s, ␣ ϭ Ϫ40j rad/s2
␣ ϭ Ϫ40j ϩ 6k rad/s2
vA ϭ Ϫ3i Ϫ 1.6j ϩ 1.2k m/s
aA ϭ Ϫ34.8j Ϫ 6.4k m/s2
␣ ϭ Ϫ1.2␲(Ί3i ϩ k) rad/s2
1
␻n ϭ (Ϫ3i ϩ 20j ϩ 9k) rad/sec
49
˙
˙
␣ ϭ Ϫ⍀p sin ␤ i ϩ ␤ (p cos ␤ Ϫ ⍀)j Ϫ p␤ sin ␤ k
vA ϭ 6.8 ft/sec, aA ϭ 20.8 ft/sec2
vA ϭ Ϫ0.636i Ϫ 4.87j ϩ 1.273k m/s
vA ϭ Ϫ6j m/s
(a) ␣ ϭ Ϫ(3.88i ϩ 3.49j)10Ϫ3 rad/s2
(b) ␣ ϭ Ϫ3.49(10Ϫ3)j rad/s2
␣ ϭ p␻2i Ϫ p␻1j ϩ ␻1␻2k
␣ ϭ Ϫ3i Ϫ 4j rad/sec2
v ϭ ␲(0.1i ϩ 0.8j ϩ 0.08k) m/s
a ϭ Ϫ␲2(6.32i ϩ 0.1k) m/s2
v ϭ ␲(0.1i ϩ 0.8j ϩ 0.08k) m/s
a ϭ Ϫ␲2(6.32i ϩ 0.1k) m/s2
˙
˙
vA ϭ Ϫ⍀(R ϩ b sin ␤)i ϩ b␤ cos ␤j Ϫ b␤ sin ␤k
˙
aA ϭ Ϫ2b⍀␤ cos ␤i ϩ [⍀2(R ϩ b sin ␤)
˙
˙
ϩ b␤ 2 sin ␤]j Ϫ b␤ 2 cos ␤k
␣ ϭ Ϫ40␲2i rad/s2
aA ϭ 2␲2(Ϫ2.4i ϩ 4j Ϫ 5k) m/s2
1
␻ ϭ i rad/sec2
˙ 8
aA ϭ 0.313i Ϫ 2.43j Ϫ 0.1083k ft/sec2
(a) ␻ ϭ ␲ Ϫ

Ί

΂

΃

v ϭ Ϫrpi Ϫ (r␻1 ϩ b␻2)k
a ϭ Ϫ␻2(b␻2 ϩ 2r␻1)i Ϫ r(␻2 ϩ p2)j ϩ 2rp␻2k
1
␻ ϭ ␲(Ϫ3i ϩ Ί3j ϩ 5k) rad/sec
␣ ϭ ␲2(4Ί3i ϩ 9j ϩ 3Ί3k) rad/sec2

΄

΃΅

΂

΂

΃

Rp2
R
␻ ϭ p j cos ␪ ϩ k sin ␪ ϩ r , ␣ ϭ r cos ␪ i
␣ ϭ 42.8 rad/s
2
vB ϭ Ϫ k m/s
3
␻n ϭ

2

΂

΃

10 40
i Ϫ 2j ϩ 6k rad/s
49 3

7/53

G ϭ mb␻Ί2, HO ϭ 3mb␻2

7/54

HO ϭ mb2␻ i ϩ 2j Ϫ

7/55

HG ϭ Ϫ1.613j Ϫ 744k kg ⅐ m /s
HA ϭ Ϫ2.70j Ϫ 744k kg ⅐ m2/s

7/56

7/57
7/58
7/59

΄

΂1 bl
6

2
2

΃΅

ϩ2 k
2

΂

΃

1
3
8
HO ϭ ␳b3␻ Ϫ i Ϫ j ϩ k
2
2
3
4
T ϭ ␳b3␻2
3
1
HG ϭ ␳b3␻(Ϫi Ϫ j ϩ 2k)
4
1
H ϭ ml2␻ sin ␪(j sin ␪ Ϫ k cos ␪)
3
2(2c ϩ b)
r
H ϭ mr␻ Ϫ
jϩ k
3␲
2

΄

΅

1
΂b3 ϩ r4 ϩ h ΃ m␻i ϩ 2mr pj
2

2

7/60

HO ϭ

7/61

HG ϭ Ip(i ϩ j ϩ k) ϩ 2(I ϩ mb2)⍀
where ⍀ ϭ ⍀xi ϩ ⍀y j ϩ ⍀zk
HO ϭ Ϫ0.01i ϩ 0.0045j ϩ 0.0576k lb-ft-sec
HO ϭ 2.38j ϩ 25.6k lb-ft-sec
T ϭ 805 ft-lb
H ϭ ␲(Ϫ0.4j ϩ 0.6k) N ⅐ m ⅐ s, T ϭ 59.2 J
1
Ϫsin ␣ cos ␣)i ϩ (sin2 ␣ ϩ 2 cos2 ␣)k
H ϭ mr2␻ (
4
␤ ϭ 4.96Њ

7/62
7/63
7/64
7/65

7/66

2

2

΄

΅

΄΂1 ϩ 6h ΃⍀i ϩ pk΅
2
r
1 h
1
3
T ϭ mr ΄΂ ϩ ΃⍀ ϩ p ΅
10
4
2
r
1
H ϭ 2m΄ l sin ␤ ϩ b ΅␻k
3
HO ϭ

2

3
mr2
10

2

2

2

2

2

2

7/67

2

O

2

2

7/68

HG ϭ 2␲mƒ(ϪkЈ2 sin ␪i ϩ k2 cos ␪ k) ϩ mk2pk

7/69

1
4b2
HO ϭ mr2 Ϫ␻1i ϩ 1 ϩ 2 ␻2 j ϩ 2pk
4
r

΄

Tϭ

΄

΂

΂

΅

΃

΃

΅

mr2
4b2
␻12 ϩ 1 ϩ 2 ␻22 ϩ 2p2
8
r

Problem Answers

7/70
7/71

HOЈ ϭ 0.1626(i ϩ 8j) lb-ft-sec
T ϭ 148.1 ft-lb

΄

1
HO ϭ m␻ 6 c2 sin 2␤j

΂

7/96
7/97
7/98
7/99
7/100

΃΅

ϩ 2 r2 ϩ 1 c2 cos2 ␤ ϩ 2b2 k
5
3
7/72

m
HO ϭ b2␻ sin 2␪i
6
c2 b2
ϩ cos2 ␪ ϩ a2 ϩ ac k
ϩ m␻
3
3
1
M ϭ 2 mbl␻2
mR␻2
mR␻2
, By ϭ
Ax ϭ Bx ϭ 0, Ay ϭ Ϫ
3
3
mbl␻2
(i sin ␪ ϩ j cos ␪)
Bϭ
2c
3Mb
3Mb
Bx ϭ
sin ␪, By ϭ Ϫ
cos ␪
2lc
2lc
M ϭ Ϫ2␳b3␻2
A ϭ 576 N, B ϭ 247 N
2
M ϭ ␲ mr2␻2
4MO
MϭϪ
3␲
M
␣ϭ
IO cos2 ␪ ϩ I sin2 ␪
M ϭ Ϫ79.0i N ⅐ m
FA ϭ 1608i N, FB ϭ Ϫ1608i N
FA ϭ Ϫ91.7j N, FB ϭ 91.7j N, M ϭ 10.8 N ⅐ m
3g b2 Ϫ c2
␪ ϭ sinϪ1
2␻2 b3 ϩ c3

΂

7/73
7/74
7/75
7/76
7/77
7/78
7/79
7/80
7/81
7/82
7/83
7/84
7/85
7/86
7/87

7/88

7/89
7/90

7/91
7/92
᭤ 7/93
᭤ 7/94

7/95

΃

΂

΂

΃

mg m2v2
Ϫ
2
2␲r
mg m2v2
ϩ
NB ϭ
2
2␲r
1
Mx ϭ 6mb2␻2 sin2 2␤
NA ϭ

My ϭ Ϫ1mb2␣ sin 2␤
6
1
Mz ϭ 12mb2␣(1 ϩ 4 sin2 ␤)

Ί

Ί3g
l
2mr
M ϭ ␲ (g ϩ 2r␻2)
A ϭ mg/6
mg 7a ϩ 2b
Aϭ
3 2a ϩ b
CCW as viewed from above

΄

Right-side normal forces are increased
M ϭ 1681 N ⅐ m, left rudder
C ϭ D ϭ 948 N
h/r ϭ Ί3/2
CCW
⍀ ϭ 6.67k rad/sec
M ϭ 5410 kN ⅐ m, (b)
(a) No precession, MA ϭ 12.56 N ⅐ m
(b) ⍀ ϭ 0.723 rad/s, MA ϭ 3.14 N ⅐ m
MA ϭ 30.9 N ⅐ m, MO ϭ 0
⌬R ϭ 98.1 lb
˙
␺ ϭ Ϫ6 rev/min (retrograde precession)
˙ ˙
␺ ϭ ␺ 1 ϭ 124.2 rad/s (direct precession)
RA ϭ 7.80 lb, RB ϭ 12.20 lb
␶ ϭ 1.831 s, negative z-direction
⍀ ϭ Ϫ1.230K rad/sec, M ϭ 67.7i lb-in.
M/m
¨
␺ϭ 2
kx cos2 ␥ ϩ kz2 sin2 ␥
ƒ ϭ 10 Hz
␶ ϭ 0.0996 s, retrograde precession
˙
(a) p ϭ 4␲ rad/s, ␪ ϭ ␤ ϭ 0, ␺ ϭ 0
(b) p ϭ 4␲ rad/s, ␪ ϭ 10Њ, ␤ ϭ 3.03Њ
˙
␺ ϭ 5.47 rad/s
˙
(c) p ϭ 0, ␪ ϭ ␤ ϭ 90Њ, ␺ ϭ 4␲ rad/s
␶ ϭ 0.443 sec
M ϭ Ϫ196.3i N ⅐ m, MO ϭ 319 N ⅐ m
1
M ϭ 12ml2p␻0 sin 2␾

7/109
7/110
7/111
7/112
7/113
7/114
7/115
7/116
7/117
7/118
7/119

΃

M ϭ 1mr2␻2 sin 2␣ j
8
4g
4g
if ␻2 Ն
␤ ϭ cosϪ1
5R
5R␻2
Otherwise ␤ ϭ 0

␻ϭ2

Tendency to rotate to student’s right
Decreased
R ϭ 712 N
b ϭ 216 mm
v
M ϭ M1 ϭ mk2⍀ r

7/101
7/102
7/103
7/104
7/105
7/106
7/107
7/108

΅

719

7/120
7/121
7/122

˙
m␪ r2
˙
p ϩ l␪
2 2b
˙
m␪ r2
2gl
˙
˙
Bz ϭ
p Ϫ l␪ where ␪ ϭ 2
2 ϩ 4l2
2 2b
r
᭤ 7/124 Mx ϭ ϪI␻⍀0 cos ␻t
᭤ 7/123 Az ϭ Ϫ

΂

΂

΃

΃

My ϭ 0
Mz ϭ ϪI␻⍀0 sin ␻t
᭤ 7/125 (a) h ϭ r/2
᭤ 7/126 M ϭ 97.9i lb-ft, T ϭ 73.8 ft-lb

l
7/127 Direct precession, r Ͼ Ί6
l
Retrograde precession, r Ͻ Ί6

΂

΃

ma2␻
iϩjϩk
6Ί3
mvh
7/129 p ϭ
, opposite to car wheels
m0 k2
7/130 ␣ ϭ 77.9i rad/s2
7/128 H ϭ

Ί

720

Problem Answers

7/131 a ϭ Ϫ2090i Ϫ 369j ϩ 4810 k in./sec2
␣ ϭ 8Ί3i ϩ 120Ί3j ϩ 52 k rad/sec2
9

7/132 ␻n ϭ 49(2i ϩ k) rad/sec
7/133 ⍀ ϭ ⍀k, ␶ ϭ 4␲r2p/(5gh)
7/134 HO ϭ Ϫ0.707j ϩ 4.45k kg ⅐ m2/s, T ϭ 69.9 J
ΊR2 Ϫ r2
r
2␲
R
Ϫr ϩ
jϩ
k
7/135 ␻ ϭ ␶
R
R
2
2
2␲ 2 ΊR Ϫ r
i
7/136 ␣ ϭ ␶
r

΄΂
΂ ΃

΅

΃

΂ ΃
2␲
2r
7/138 a ϭ ΂ ␶ ΃ ΄ΊR Ϫ r ΂
R
R
2r
ϩ ΂3r Ϫ r Ϫ
k
R ΃ ΅
2

2

2

2

2

2

b
b
΂2i ϩ ␲j ϩ 2rk΃

᭤ 7/146 H ϭ mr␻

4␲
r2
7/137 vA ϭ Ϫ ␶ R Ϫ
i
R
A

7/139 N ϭ 1.988 cycles/min
7/140 HO ϭ 0.421j ϩ 1.281k lb-ft-sec
T ϭ 11.30 ft-lb
7/141 HO ϭ 0.0867i ϩ 0.421j ϩ 1.281k lb-ft-sec
T ϭ 11.85 ft-lb, no
7/142 ͉RA ͉ ϭ ͉RB ͉ ϭ 159.3 lb
7/143 M ϭ 271 lb-ft
7/144 M ϭ 13.33 N ⅐ m
7/145 M ϭ 2.70 N ⅐ m

΃

Ϫ3 j

3

2

Chapter 8
8/1
8/2
8/3
8/4
8/5
8/6
8/7
8/8
8/9
8/10
8/12
8/13
8/14
8/15
8/16
8/17
8/18
8/19
8/20
8/21
8/22

k ϭ 736 N/m, 4.20 lb/in., 50.4 lb/ft
6
␻n ϭ 12 rad/sec, ƒn ϭ ␲ Hz
x ϭ 2 cos 12t in.
x ϭ 2.08 sin (12t Ϫ 1.287) in., C ϭ 2.08 in.
␲
␦st ϭ 0.273 m, ␶ ϭ s, vmax ϭ 0.6 m/s
3
y ϭ 0.0660 m, v ϭ 0.451 m/s, both down
amax ϭ 3.6 m/s2
ƒn ϭ 7.40 Hz
amax ϭ 30 m/s2
ƒn ϭ 3.90 Hz
ƒn ϭ 1.332 Hz
(a) k ϭ 474 kN/m, (b) ƒn ϭ 0.905 Hz
1
1
1
(a) k ϭ k1 ϩ k2, (b) ϭ
ϩ
k k1 k2
m ϭ 2.55 kg, ␮s ϭ 0.358
(a) v ϭ 88.0 cos 21.5t in./sec, (b) xmax ϭ 4.09 in.
ƒn ϭ 3.30 Hz
2T
␻n ϭ
ml
ƒn ϭ 0.301 Hz
6EI
␻n ϭ 2
mL3
x ϭ 9.20(10Ϫ3)(1 Ϫ cos 10.16t)
ϩ 59.7(10Ϫ3) sin 10.16t m
ƒn ϭ 3.07 Hz
4
2 m
k
y
¨ ϩ m c y ϭ 0, ␶ ϭ 2␲ b
c
k
b

Ί

Ί

΂΃

΂ ΃Ί

8/23

␻n ϭ

Ί5m
k

b
b
x
΄m ϩ a m ΅¨ ϩ ΄k ϩ a k ΅x ϭ 0
k
␻Ј ϭ m
Ί
2

8/24

1

2

2

2

1

1

2

2

1

n

8/25
8/26
8/27
8/28
8/29
8/30
8/31
8/32
8/33
8/34
8/35
8/36
8/37
8/38
8/39
8/40
8/41
8/42
8/43

␨ ϭ 0.75
c ϭ 38.0 N ⅐ s/m
␨ ϭ 0.436
␨ ϭ 0.6
c ϭ 154.4 lb-sec/ft
␨ ϭ 0.215, k ϭ 175.5 N/m, c ϭ 9.02 N ⅐ s/m
x0
␦N
␨ϭ
, where ␦N ϭ ln x
2ϩ␦ 2
N
Ί(2␲N)
N
Ϫ10.5t
x ϭ x0 (cos 9.26t ϩ 1.134 sin 9.26t)e
␨ ϭ 0.1097
(a) c ϭ 7.48 lb-sec/ft, (b) c ϭ 22.4 lb-sec/ft
c ϭ 16.24(103) N ⅐ s/m
x1 ϭ Ϫ0.1630x0
(x 0)c ϭ Ϫ␻nx0
˙
(a) x ϭ 4.42 in., (b) x ϭ 4.72 in.
xmax ϭ 0.286 ft
␨ ϭ 0.274, c ϭ 39.9 lb-sec/ft
c
␨ϭ
4Ίk(m1 ϩ 4m2)
a2
a2
m1 ϩ 2 m2 ¨ ϩ 2 cx ϩ kx ϭ 0
x
˙
b
b
2
cb2
c
k
x
x
¨ ϩ b2 m˙ ϩ mx ϭ 0, ␨ ϭ 2
a
2a Ίkm

΂ ΃

΄

΅

Problem Answers

᭤ 8/44

8/45
8/46
8/47
8/48
8/49
8/50
8/51
8/52
8/53
8/54
8/55
8/56
8/57
8/58
8/59
8/60

rϭ

2␮kg
␲

m

Ίk

8/75

(a) X ϭ 1.344(10Ϫ2) m, (b) X ϭ 2.27(10Ϫ2) m
␨ ϭ 0.1936
␻ Ͻ 5.10 rad/sec and ␻ Ͼ 6.78 rad/sec
␻ Ͻ 5.32 rad/sec and ␻ Ͼ 6.50 rad/sec
c ϭ 3.33 lb-sec/ft
(a) X ϭ 0.251 ft, (b) X ϭ 0.0791 ft, ␦st ϭ 0.25 ft
k
␻c ϭ
6m
R1 ϭ 50%, R2 ϭ 2.52%
ƒ Յ 4.68 Hz and ƒ Ն 6.66 Hz
␻
ϭ Ί1 – 2␨2
␻n
y0 ϭ 8.15 mm
␻
2
␻
Ͻ
and
Ͼ Ί2
␻n
␻n
3
N Յ 108.1 rev/min or N Ն 153.5 rev/min
g
1
ƒϭ
2␲ ␦st
2.38 Յ ƒn Յ 5.32 Hz
mx ϩ cx ϩ (k1 ϩ k2)x ϭ k2b cos ␻t
¨
˙
k1 ϩ k2
␻c ϭ
m

Ί

Ί

Ί

Ί

8/61

8/62

mx ϩ (c1 ϩ c2)x ϩ kx ϭ Ϫc2b␻ sin ␻t
¨
˙
c1 ϩ c2
k
␻c ϭ m, ␨ ϭ
2Ίkm

Ί
TϭM
Ί1 ϩ ΂2␨␻␻ ΃

2

8/76
8/77
8/78
8/79
8/80
8/81

8/66
8/67
8/68
᭤ 8/69
᭤ 8/70
8/71
8/72

8/73
8/74

΂

΃

Ί

¨
␪ϩ

΂g ϩ 2kb ΃␪ ϭ 0, ␶ ϭ
l
ml
2

2

Ί

3g
2

␻n ϭ 4
Ί a 2 ϩ b2
1 2g
ƒn ϭ ␲
3␲r

Ί

Ί

2␲
g 2kb2
ϩ
l
ml2

n

n

2mr2
(␶2/␶1)2 Ϫ 1
R ϭ 2/Ί3
1 13k
ƒn ϭ
m
4␲
Iϭ

Ί

8/89

␶ϭ␲

8/84
8/85
8/86
8/87

8/90

k ϭ 227 kN/m or 823 kN/m
b ϭ 1.886 mm
amax ϭ 75.0 m/s2
F0
x ϭ (1Ϫ cos ␻nt)
k
b2
b
mx ϩ cx ϩ k1 ϩ k2 2 x ϭ k2 b0 cos ␻t
¨
˙
a
a
c ϭ 44.6 N ⅐ s/m
X ϭ 14.75 mm, vc ϭ 15.23 km/h
P ϭ cX 2␻2/2
m
␶ ϭ 6␲
5k

2b

8/88

8/83

n

8/63
8/64
8/65

Ί3g
5b
␶ ϭ 2␲
Ί6g
3 g
␻ ϭ
2Ί2b
g
␻ ϭ
Ί2b
␶ ϭ 2␲

x ϭ 0.558 m
k
b
ƒn ϭ
2␲l m
3
2b2
1 a2
c
, ccr ϭ 2
␨ϭ
2 b2
a
km
k ϭ 3820 N/m
␶ ϭ 13.05 sec
kO2
a2
m1 ϩ 2 m2 ϩ 2 m3 ¨ ϩ
x
b
b
r
␶ ϭ 7.78 g

8/82

8/91
8/92

8/93
8/94
8/95
᭤ 8/96

8/97
8/98
8/99

721

Ί
Ί

Ί3

΄

km

x
΅ ΄a c΅˙ ϩ kx ϭ 0
b
2

2

Ί

Ίg sin ␤
6 2k g
␻ ϭ
Ί5 ΂ m ϩ l ΃
3r␤

c

Ί

␶ ϭ 2␲

␪0
3(R Ϫ r)
, ␻ ϭ r Ί2g(R Ϫ r)/3
2g

1
m )x ϩ (k1 ϩ k2)x ϭ k1b cos ␻t
¨
2 1
3b
Ϫ ␻2
2 l
3⌲ Ϫ 3g
⌰ϭ 2
, where ␻n ϭ
ml2
2l
␻n Ϫ ␻2
1 JG
ƒn ϭ
2␲ IL
(m2 ϩ

Ί

Ί

2¨
mkO ␪ ϩ K␪ Ϫ mr(g sin ␪ ϩ a cos ␪) ϭ 0
␻n ϭ 10.24 rad/sec, v ϭ 11.95 ft/sec
␨ ϭ 1.707
x
¨ ϩ 8x ϭ 0, ␶ ϭ 2.22 sec
3g(m ϩ 2M)
¨
␪ϩ
␪ϭ0
2l(m ϩ 3M)

΄

␻n ϭ

΅

Ί΂

k

m 1ϩ

Ί3g

8/100 ␶ ϭ 2␲

2l

k2
r2

΃

722

Problem Answers

Ί

8/122 ␻n ϭ

1 b k
2␲ l m
8/102 ƒn ϭ 1.519 Hz
8/103 ␶ ϭ 0.326 sec
6(R Ϫ r)
8/104 ␶ ϭ ␲
g
8/101 ƒn ϭ

8/105 ␻n
8/106 ␻n
8/107 ␻n

Ί
6k
6k
ϭ3
Ί3m ϩ 26m , ␻ ϭ 3␪ Ί3m ϩ 26m
6k 3g
ϭ
Ί m ϩ 2l
k
ϭ
Ί5m
1

0

2

1

8/108 ␶ ϭ 0.957 s

΄

Ί΂

΅

΃

m
ΊΊ3d ϩ 4k
l
8/124 ␶ ϭ 2␲
Ίg cos (␣/2)
g
1
8/125 ƒ ϭ
2␲Ί2r
8/123 ␻c ϭ

2g

n

8/126 x0 ϭ

3␮smg

k
8/127 ␨ ϭ 0.0697
r0/r

8/128 ␪max ϭ ␾0

1/2
mgr0
1
8/109 ƒn ϭ 2␲
2 ϩ m(r Ϫ r )2
3Mr
0

8/110 ƒn ϭ 3.65 Hz
2b
8/111 ␶ ϭ 2␲
3g sin ␣
8/112 ƒn ϭ 1.496 Hz
8/113 ␶ ϭ 7.78Ίr/g
8/114 ƒn ϭ 1.142 Hz
8/115 ƒn ϭ 2.62 Hz
l
8/116 ␶ ϭ 2␲
3g
(␲ Ϫ 2)r
8/117 ␶ ϭ 2␲
g

2

g Mϩm
l M ϩ 2m
3

1Ϫ

␻
΂␻ ΃

2

, where ␻n ϭ

r
k

Ίm

2k

n

8/129 X ϭ 0.507 in.
8/130 ␦0 ϭ 0.712 mm
8/131 (ƒn)y ϭ 4.95 Hz, (ƒn)␪ ϭ 10.75 Hz
N ϭ 645 rev/min

Ί

Ί

8/132 ␶ ϭ 2␲

Ί
Ί
R
᭤ 8/118 ␶ ϭ 41.4 g
Ί

8/119 c ϭ 4580 N ⅐ s/m
8/120 ␶ ϭ 7.33 s
g
8/121 (a) ␻n ϭ 2
, (b) ␻n ϭ
5r

Ί

2mR2 ϩ MR2 Ϫ 1 Ml2
6

΂

gΊ4R2 Ϫ l2 m ϩ

M
2

΃

* 8/133 t ϭ 0.0544 s or 0.442 s
* 8/134 Mmax ϭ 1.809 at N ϭ 90.6 rev/min, ␨ ϭ 0.289
* 8/135 xmax ϭ 0.1955 ft at t ϭ 0.0462 sec
xmin ϭ Ϫ0.0792 ft at t ϭ 0.1923 sec
* 8/136 0 Ͻ k Ͻ 1.895 lb/ft
* 8/137 (a) y ϭ 0.1722eϪ9.16t Ϫ 0.0722eϪ21.8t m
(b) y ϭ 0.1414eϪ10t sin (10t ϩ 0.785) m
* 8/138 x ϭ 0.0926(t Ϫ 0.0913 sin 10.95t) m
* 8/139 x ϭ 0.284eϪ0.707t Ϫ sin 7.04t

Ί 3r

2g

Appendix B
1

1

1

1

B/7

B/1

Iyy ϭ 12ml2, IyЈyЈ ϭ 3ml2

B/2

Ixx ϭ 12ma2, Iyy ϭ 12mb2, Izz ϭ 12m(a2 ϩ b2)

B/3

Ixx ϭ 1mb2, kx ϭ 0.354b
8

B/8

Ixx ϭ 1mh2, Iyy ϭ 3mb2
7
5

1
1
Ixx ϭ 12mL2 sin2 ␤, Iyy ϭ 12mL2 cos2 ␤

1

1
Izz ϭ 12mL2

B/4

Ixx ϭ 1mh2, kx ϭ h/Ί6
6
Iyy ϭ 1mb2, ky ϭ b/Ί6
6

Izz ϭ 1m(h2 ϩ b2), kz ϭ 0.408Ίh2 ϩ b2
6
B/5

IO ϭ 158.9

B/6

Ixx ϭ 1mb2, kx ϭ 0.354b
8

΂3b
5

Izz ϭ m

2

ϩ

h2
7

΃

B/9

3
Ixx ϭ 7mh2, kx ϭ 0.655h

B/10

1
Iyy ϭ 20mb2, ky ϭ 0.224b

B/11

Ixx ϭ 10mr2, Iyy ϭ 5m

B/12

Ixx ϭ 1mb2, Iyy ϭ 1ma2, Izz ϭ 1m(a2 ϩ b2)
4
4
4

kg ⅐ mm2

3

3

΂r4 ϩ h ΃
2

2

Problem Answers

B/13

Ixx ϭ 2mr2
7

B/14

Iyy ϭ Izz ϭ m

B/15

Ixx ϭ 2mb2
9

B/16

kz ϭ r/Ί3

B/44
B/45
B/46
B/47

΂r7 ϩ 2h ΃
3
2

2

B/48

΂

B/20

kϭ

B/18

B/21
B/22

2

2

aa

3
4

2

Ixx ϭ 3m1r2, Ixx ϭ m2r2
2

Iyy ϭ 0.01398 lb-ft-sec2
Ixx ϭ 0.410 lb-in.-sec2

B/54

39

Ixx ϭ 1mR2
4
IA ϭ 0.1701ma2

B/52
B/53

Ί5
m
l
I ϭ ΂r ϩ ΃
2
6
I ϭ m΂R ϩ a ΃
a
2

kO ϭ 97.5 mm
r25 Ϫ r15
3
Ixx ϭ 10m 3
r2 Ϫ r13

B/55

B/57
B/58
B/59

Ixy ϭ Ϫmab, Iyz ϭ Ϫ1mbh, Ixz ϭ 1mah
2
2

B/60

Ixz ϭ Iyz ϭ 0, Ixy ϭ

B/23

Ixx ϭ 166mb2
147

B/24

83
23
Iyy ϭ m 147 b2 ϩ 196 L2

B/25

1
Iyy ϭ 10mh2

B/26

b2
1
ϩ h2
Izz ϭ 10m
2

B/61

B/27

Iϭ1
2

B/62

B/28

Ixx ϭ Izz ϭ 2mr2
3

B/29

1
Ixx ϭ 2m r2 ϩ

΂

΃

΂

΃
m΂2R ϩ 3a ΃
2

΂

b2
6

4
΂3 Ϫ ␲΃
2

IZZ ϭ 1mR2 (1 ϩ cos2 ␪)
4
Ixy ϭ 0, Ixz ϭ Iyz ϭ Ϫ2ml2
Ixy ϭ Ϫ2ml2, Ixz ϭ Ϫ4ml2, Iyz ϭ 0

᭤ B/56

2

2

IO ϭ m(7x2 ϩ 1l2), R ϭ 0.582
3

B/51

΃

B/19

B/17

Iyy ϭ 0.0250 kg ⅐ m2
I ϭ 1.031 kg ⅐ m2, n ϭ 97.8%
Ixx ϭ Izz ϭ 3mb2, Iyy ϭ 1mb2
4
6
Ix0x0 ϭ 0.1010 kg ⅐ m2

B/49
B/50

r2
Iyy ϭ 1m h2 ϩ
2
3
53
Ixx ϭ 200mR2
Ixx ϭ 1m(a2 ϩ b2)
5

B/63

΃

723

B/64

ma2 sin2 ␤
4␤

␳␲b4
, I ϭ Iyz ϭ 0
512 xz
1
Ixy ϭ 1mr2, Ixz ϭ Iyz ϭ
mr2
4
␲Ί2
Ixy ϭ Ϫ1.553 lb-in.-sec2
Iyz ϭ 0.776 lb-in.-sec2
Ixz ϭ Ϫ1.035 lb-in.-sec2
1
Ixy ϭ Ϫ24ml2 sin 2␪
Ixy ϭ Ϫ

B/31

kz ϭ 0.890a
Ixx ϭ 2mL2, Iyy ϭ 4mL2, Izz ϭ 2mL2

B/32

Izz ϭ 1mr2
2

B/66

Ixy ϭ Ϫ1mb2, Ixz ϭ 0, Iyz ϭ Ϫ1mb2
8
8

B/33

B/67

Ixy ϭ 2mr2/␲, Ixz ϭ Iyz ϭ 0

B/68

Ixy ϭ 1mb2 sin 2␪, Ixz ϭ 1mbh cos ␪
6
4

B/35

(a) ͉e͉ ϭ 0.498%, (b) ͉e ͉ ϭ 11.11%
Ϫ100
eϭ
(in percent)
1/3
1ϩ
(r/l)2
IOO ϭ 1.767 lb-ft-sec2

B/36

Ixx ϭ 1m r22 ϩ r12
2

B/37

Izz

᭤ B/30

B/34

΂
m
ϭ
15r
12 ΂

2

΃

ϩ L2

kg ⅐ m2

΃

Ixx ϭ 0.1220

B/39

2
Iaa ϭ 1mr2, Ibb ϭ 2mr2 1 Ϫ ␲
2

΂

΃

B/41
B/42

Ixx ϭ Iyy ϭ 0.0270 lb-ft-sec
IyЈyЈ ϭ 0.0433 lb-ft-sec2, Izz ϭ 0.0539 lb-ft-sec2
Ixx ϭ 1.898 lb-in.-sec2
L ϭ rΊ3/2

B/43

43
83
Iyy ϭ 192 ϩ 128␲ ␳L3

΂

΃

B/69
B/70
B/71
* B/73

B/38

B/40

B/65

2

* B/74
* B/75
* B/76
* B/77
* B/78

IZZ ϭ 1mR2 (1 ϩ cos2 ␪)
4

Iyz ϭ 1mbh sin ␪
4
mb2
mb2
1
Ixy ϭ
, Ixz ϭ Ϫ12mb2, Iyz ϭ Ϫ
4Ί2
4Ί2
IAA ϭ 1ma2
6
IAB ϭ 2.58 kg ⅐ m2
I1 ϭ 7.53mb2, I2 ϭ 6.63mb2, I3 ϭ 1.844mb2
l1 ϭ 0.521, m1 ϭ Ϫ0.756, n1 ϭ 0.397
Imin ϭ 0.1870␳r3 at ␣ ϭ 38.6Њ
I1 ϭ 9ml2, I2 ϭ 7.37ml2, I3 ϭ 1.628ml2
l1 ϭ 0.816, m1 ϭ 0.408, n1 ϭ 0.408
I1 ϭ 0.750mb2, I2 ϭ 0.799mb2, I3 ϭ 0.1173mb2
l1 ϭ 0.1903, m1 ϭ Ϫ0.963, n1 ϭ 0.1903
I1 ϭ 3.78␳b4, I2 ϭ 0.612␳b4, I3 ϭ 3.61␳b4
I1 ϭ 1.448␳b3, I2 ϭ 0.360␳b3, I3 ϭ 1.142␳b3
l ϭ 0, m ϭ 0.550, n ϭ 0.835

Conversion Factors
U.S. Customary Units to SI Units
To convert from
(Acceleration)
foot/second2 (ft/sec2)
inch/second2 (in./sec2)
(Area)
foot2 (ft2)
inch2 (in.2)
(Density)
pound mass/inch3 (lbm/in.3)
pound mass/foot3 (lbm/ft3)
(Force)
kip (1000 lb)
pound force (lb)
(Length)
foot (ft)
inch (in.)
mile (mi), (U.S. statute)
mile (mi), (international nautical)
(Mass)
pound mass (lbm)
slug (lb-sec2/ft)
ton (2000 lbm)
(Moment of force)
pound-foot (lb-ft)
pound-inch (lb-in.)
(Moment of inertia, area)
inch4
(Moment of inertia, mass)
pound-foot-second2 (lb-ft-sec2)
(Momentum, linear)
pound-second (lb-sec)
(Momentum, angular)
pound-foot-second (lb-ft-sec)
(Power)
foot-pound/minute (ft-lb/min)
horsepower (550 ft-lb/sec)
(Pressure, stress)
atmosphere (std)(14.7 lb/in.2)
pound/foot2 (lb/ft2)
pound/inch2 (lb/in.2 or psi)
(Spring constant)
pound/inch (lb/in.)
(Velocity)
foot/second (ft/sec)
knot (nautical mi/hr)
mile/hour (mi/hr)
mile/hour (mi/hr)
(Volume)
foot3 (ft3)
inch3 (in.3)
(Work, Energy)
British thermal unit (BTU)
foot-pound force (ft-lb)
kilowatt-hour (kw-h)
*Exact value

To

Multiply by

meter/second2 (m/s2)
meter/second2 (m/s2)

3.048 ϫ 10Ϫ1*
2.54 ϫ 10Ϫ2*

meter2 (m2)
meter2 (m2)

9.2903 ϫ 10Ϫ2
6.4516 ϫ 10Ϫ4*

kilogram/meter3 (kg/m3)
kilogram/meter3 (kg/m3)

2.7680 ϫ 104
1.6018 ϫ 10

newton (N)
newton (N)

4.4482 ϫ 103
4.4482

meter (m)
meter (m)
meter (m)
meter (m)

3.048 ϫ 10Ϫ1*
2.54 ϫ 10Ϫ2*
1.6093 ϫ 103
1.852 ϫ 103*

kilogram (kg)
kilogram (kg)
kilogram (kg)

4.5359 ϫ 10Ϫ1
1.4594 ϫ 10
9.0718 ϫ 102

newton-meter (N ⅐ m)
newton-meter (N ⅐ m)

1.3558
0.1129 8

meter4 (m4)

41.623 ϫ 10Ϫ8

kilogram-meter2 (kg ⅐ m2)

1.3558

kilogram-meter/second (kg ⅐ m/s)

4.4482

newton-meter-second (kg ⅐ m2/s)

1.3558

watt (W)
watt (W)

2.2597 ϫ 10Ϫ2
7.4570 ϫ 102

newton/meter2 (N/m2 or Pa)
newton/meter2 (N/m2 or Pa)
newton/meter2 (N/m2 or Pa)

1.0133 ϫ 105
4.7880 ϫ 10
6.8948 ϫ 103

newton/meter (N/m)

1.7513 ϫ 102

meter/second (m/s)
meter/second (m/s)
meter/second (m/s)
kilometer/hour (km/h)

3.048 ϫ 10Ϫ1*
5.1444 ϫ 10Ϫ1
4.4704 ϫ 10Ϫ1*
1.6093

meter3 (m3)
meter3 (m3)

2.8317 ϫ 10Ϫ2
1.6387 ϫ 10Ϫ5

joule (J)
joule (J)
joule (J)

1.0551 ϫ 103
1.3558
3.60 ϫ 106*

SI Units Used in Mechanics
Quantity

Unit

SI Symbol

(Base Units)
Length
meter*
Mass
kilogram
Time
second
(Derived Units)
Acceleration, linear
meter/second2
Acceleration, angular
radian/second2
Area
meter2
Density
kilogram/meter3
Force
newton
Frequency
hertz
Impulse, linear
newton-second
Impulse, angular
newton-meter-second
Moment of force
newton-meter
Moment of inertia, area
meter4
Moment of inertia, mass
kilogram-meter2
Momentum, linear
kilogram-meter/second
Momentum, angular
kilogram-meter2/second
Power
watt
Pressure, stress
pascal
Product of inertia, area
meter4
Product of inertia, mass
kilogram-meter2
Spring constant
newton/meter
Velocity, linear
meter/second
Velocity, angular
radian/second
Volume
meter3
Work, energy
joule
(Supplementary and Other Acceptable Units)
Distance (navigation)
nautical mile
Mass
ton (metric)
Plane angle
degrees (decimal)
Plane angle
radian
Speed
knot
Time
day
Time
hour
Time
minute
*Also spelled metre.

m
kg
s
m/s2
rad/s2
m2
kg/m3
N (ϭ kg ⅐ m/s2)
Hz (ϭ 1/s)
N⅐s
N⅐m⅐s
N⅐m
m4
kg ⅐ m2
kg ⅐ m/s (ϭ N ⅐ s)
kg ⅐ m2/s (ϭ N ⅐ m ⅐ s)
W (ϭ J/s ϭ N ⅐ m/s)
Pa (ϭ N/m2)
m4
kg ⅐ m2
N/m
m/s
rad/s
m3
J (ϭ N ⅐ m)
(ϭ 1.852 km)
t (ϭ 1000 kg)
Њ
—
(1.852 km/h)
d
h
min

Selected Rules for Writing Metric Quantities
SI Unit Preﬁxes
Multiplication Factor
1 000 000 000 000 ϭ 1012
1 000 000 000 ϭ 109
1 000 000 ϭ 106
1 000 ϭ 103
100 ϭ 102
10 ϭ 10
0.1 ϭ 10Ϫ1
0.01 ϭ 10Ϫ2
0.001 ϭ 10Ϫ3
0.000 001 ϭ 10Ϫ6
0.000 000 001 ϭ 10Ϫ9
0.000 000 000 001 ϭ 10Ϫ12

Preﬁx
tera
giga
mega
kilo
hecto
deka
deci
centi
milli
micro
nano
pico

Symbol
T
G
M
k
h
da
d
c
m
␮
n
p

1. (a) Use preﬁxes to keep numerical values generally between 0.1 and 1000.
(b) Use of the preﬁxes hecto, deka, deci, and centi should generally be avoided
except for certain areas or volumes where the numbers would be awkward
otherwise.
(c) Use preﬁxes only in the numerator of unit combinations. The one exception
is the base unit kilogram. (Example: write kN/m not N/mm; J/kg not mJ/g)
(d) Avoid double preﬁxes. (Example: write GN not kMN)
2. Unit designations
(a) Use a dot for multiplication of units. (Example: write N ⅐ m not Nm)
(b) Avoid ambiguous double solidus. (Example: write N/m2 not N/m/m)
(c) Exponents refer to entire unit. (Example: mm2 means (mm)2)
3. Number grouping
Use a space rather than a comma to separate numbers in groups of three,
counting from the decimal point in both directions. (Example: 4 607 321.048 72)
Space may be omitted for numbers of four digits. (Example: 4296 or 0.0476)

Conversion Charts Between SI and U.S. Customary Units

Conversion Charts Between SI and U.S. Customary Units (cont)

