Conversion Factors
U.S. Customary Units to SI Units
To convert from
(Acceleration)
foot/second2 (ft/sec2)
inch/second2 (in./sec2)
(Area)
foot2 (ft2)
inch2 (in.2)
(Density)
pound mass/inch3 (lbm/in.3)
pound mass/foot3 (lbm/ft3)
(Force)
kip (1000 lb)
pound force (lb)
(Length)
foot (ft)
inch (in.)
mile (mi), (U.S. statute)
mile (mi), (international nautical)
(Mass)
pound mass (lbm)
slug (lb-sec2/ft)
ton (2000 lbm)
(Moment of force)
pound-foot (lb-ft)
pound-inch (lb-in.)
(Moment of inertia, area)
inch4
(Moment of inertia, mass)
pound-foot-second2 (lb-ft-sec2)
(Momentum, linear)
pound-second (lb-sec)
(Momentum, angular)
pound-foot-second (lb-ft-sec)
(Power)
foot-pound/minute (ft-lb/min)
horsepower (550 ft-lb/sec)
(Pressure, stress)
atmosphere (std)(14.7 lb/in.2)
pound/foot2 (lb/ft2)
pound/inch2 (lb/in.2 or psi)
(Spring constant)
pound/inch (lb/in.)
(Velocity)
foot/second (ft/sec)
knot (nautical mi/hr)
mile/hour (mi/hr)
mile/hour (mi/hr)
(Volume)
foot3 (ft3)
inch3 (in.3)
(Work, Energy)
British thermal unit (BTU)
foot-pound force (ft-lb)
kilowatt-hour (kw-h)
*Exact value

To

Multiply by

meter/second2 (m/s2)
meter/second2 (m/s2)

3.048 ϫ 10Ϫ1*
2.54 ϫ 10Ϫ2*

meter2 (m2)
meter2 (m2)

9.2903 ϫ 10Ϫ2
6.4516 ϫ 10Ϫ4*

kilogram/meter3 (kg/m3)
kilogram/meter3 (kg/m3)

2.7680 ϫ 104
1.6018 ϫ 10

newton (N)
newton (N)

4.4482 ϫ 103
4.4482

meter (m)
meter (m)
meter (m)
meter (m)

3.048 ϫ 10Ϫ1*
2.54 ϫ 10Ϫ2*
1.6093 ϫ 103
1.852 ϫ 103*

kilogram (kg)
kilogram (kg)
kilogram (kg)

4.5359 ϫ 10Ϫ1
1.4594 ϫ 10
9.0718 ϫ 102

newton-meter (N ⅐ m)
newton-meter (N ⅐ m)

1.3558
0.1129 8

meter4 (m4)

41.623 ϫ 10Ϫ8

kilogram-meter2 (kg ⅐ m2)

1.3558

kilogram-meter/second (kg ⅐ m/s)

4.4482

newton-meter-second (kg ⅐ m2/s)

1.3558

watt (W)
watt (W)

2.2597 ϫ 10Ϫ2
7.4570 ϫ 102

newton/meter2 (N/m2 or Pa)
newton/meter2 (N/m2 or Pa)
newton/meter2 (N/m2 or Pa)

1.0133 ϫ 105
4.7880 ϫ 10
6.8948 ϫ 103

newton/meter (N/m)

1.7513 ϫ 102

meter/second (m/s)
meter/second (m/s)
meter/second (m/s)
kilometer/hour (km/h)

3.048 ϫ 10Ϫ1*
5.1444 ϫ 10Ϫ1
4.4704 ϫ 10Ϫ1*
1.6093

meter3 (m3)
meter3 (m3)

2.8317 ϫ 10Ϫ2
1.6387 ϫ 10Ϫ5

joule (J)
joule (J)
joule (J)

1.0551 ϫ 103
1.3558
3.60 ϫ 106*

SI Units Used in Mechanics
Quantity

Unit

SI Symbol

(Base Units)
Length
meter*
Mass
kilogram
Time
second
(Derived Units)
Acceleration, linear
meter/second2
Acceleration, angular
radian/second2
Area
meter2
Density
kilogram/meter3
Force
newton
Frequency
hertz
Impulse, linear
newton-second
Impulse, angular
newton-meter-second
Moment of force
newton-meter
Moment of inertia, area
meter4
Moment of inertia, mass
kilogram-meter2
Momentum, linear
kilogram-meter/second
Momentum, angular
kilogram-meter2/second
Power
watt
Pressure, stress
pascal
Product of inertia, area
meter4
Product of inertia, mass
kilogram-meter2
Spring constant
newton/meter
Velocity, linear
meter/second
Velocity, angular
radian/second
Volume
meter3
Work, energy
joule
(Supplementary and Other Acceptable Units)
Distance (navigation)
nautical mile
Mass
ton (metric)
Plane angle
degrees (decimal)
Plane angle
radian
Speed
knot
Time
day
Time
hour
Time
minute
*Also spelled metre.

m
kg
s
m/s2
rad/s2
m2
kg/m3
N (ϭ kg ⅐ m/s2)
Hz (ϭ 1/s)
N⅐s
N⅐m⅐s
N⅐m
m4
kg ⅐ m2
kg ⅐ m/s (ϭ N ⅐ s)
kg ⅐ m2/s (ϭ N ⅐ m ⅐ s)
W (ϭ J/s ϭ N ⅐ m/s)
Pa (ϭ N/m2)
m4
kg ⅐ m2
N/m
m/s
rad/s
m3
J (ϭ N ⅐ m)
(ϭ 1,852 km)
t (ϭ 1000 kg)
Њ
—
(1.852 km/h)
d
h
min

Selected Rules for Writing Metric Quantities
SI Unit Preﬁxes
Multiplication Factor
1 000 000 000 000 ϭ 1012
1 000 000 000 ϭ 109
1 000 000 ϭ 106
1 000 ϭ 103
100 ϭ 102
10 ϭ 10
0.1 ϭ 10Ϫ1
0.01 ϭ 10Ϫ2
0.001 ϭ 10Ϫ3
0.000 001 ϭ 10Ϫ6
0.000 000 001 ϭ 10Ϫ9
0.000 000 000 001 ϭ 10Ϫ12

Preﬁx
tera
giga
mega
kilo
hecto
deka
deci
centi
milli
micro
nano
pico

Symbol
T
G
M
k
h
da
d
c
m
␮
n
p

1. (a) Use preﬁxes to keep numerical values generally between 0.1 and 1000.
(b) Use of the preﬁxes hecto, deka, deci, and centi should generally be avoided
except for certain areas or volumes where the numbers would be awkward
otherwise.
(c) Use preﬁxes only in the numerator of unit combinations. The one exception
is the base unit kilogram. (Example: write kN/m not N/mm; J/kg not mJ/g)
(d) Avoid double preﬁxes. (Example: write GN not kMN)
2. Unit designations
(a) Use a dot for multiplication of units. (Example: write N ⅐ m not Nm)
(b) Avoid ambiguous double solidus. (Example: write N/m2 not N/m/m)
(c) Exponents refer to entire unit. (Example: mm2 means (mm)2)
3. Number grouping
Use a space rather than a comma to separate numbers in groups of three,
counting from the decimal point in both directions. Example: 4 607 321.048 72)
Space may be omitted for numbers of four digits. (Example: 4296 or 0.0476)

This page intentionally left blank

Engineering Mechanics
Volume 1

Statics
Seventh Edition

This page intentionally left blank

Engineering Mechanics
Volume 1

Statics
Seventh Edition

J. L. Meriam
L. G. Kraige
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University

John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

On the Cover: The cable-stayed Millau Viaduct spans the Tarn River Valley in southern France.
Designed by structural engineer Michel Virlogeux and architect Norman Foster, the viaduct opened in
2004. Both the pylons and the separate masts which rest on the pylons set world records for height.
Associate Publisher
Acquisitions Editor
Editorial Assistant
Senior Production Editor
Marketing Manager
Senior Designer
Cover Design
Cover Photo
Electronic Illustrations
Senior Photo Editor
New Media Editor

Don Fowley
Linda Ratts
Christopher Teja
Sujin Hong; Production Management Services provided by
Camelot Editorial Services, LLC
Christopher Ruel
Maureen Eide
Maureen Eide
Image Copyright Shutterstock/Richard Semik 2011
Precision Graphics
Lisa Gee
Andre Legaspi

This book was set in 10.5/12 ITC Century Schoolbook by PreMediaGlobal, and printed and bound by
RR Donnelley. The cover was printed by RR Donnelley.
This book is printed on acid-free paper. ȍ
Founded in 1807, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. has been a valued source of knowledge and understanding
for more than 200 years, helping people around the world meet their needs and fulﬁll their
aspirations. Our company is built on a foundation of principles that include responsibility to the
communities we serve and where we live and work. In 2008, we launched a Corporate Citizenship
Initiative, a global effort to address the environmental, social, economic, and ethical challenges we
face in our business. Among the issues we are addressing are carbon impact, paper speciﬁcations
and procurement, ethical conduct within our business and among our vendors, and community and
charitable support. For more information, please visit our website: www.wiley.com/go/citizenship.
Copyright ᭧ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning or otherwise, except as permitted under Sections 107
or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission of the
Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright
Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, website www.copyright.com.
Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John
Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030-5774, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008,
website http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Evaluation copies are provided to qualiﬁed academics and professionals for review purposes only, for
use in their courses during the next academic year. These copies are licensed and may not be sold or
transferred to a third party. Upon completion of the review period, please return the evaluation
copy to Wiley. Return instructions and a free of charge return mailing label are available at
www.wiley.com/go/returnlabel. If you have chosen to adopt this textbook for use in your course,
please accept this book as your complimentary desk copy. Outside of the United States, please
contact your local sales representative.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Meriam, J. L. (James L.)
Engineering mechanics / J.L. Meriam, L.G. Kraige.—7th ed.
p. cm.
Includes index.
ISBN: 978-0-470-61473-0
ISBN: 978-0-470-91787-9 (BRV)
1. Mechanics, Applied. I. Kraige, L.G. (L. Glenn) II. Title.
TA350.M458 2006
620.1—dc
2006003346
Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

Foreword

This series of textbooks was begun in 1951 by the late Dr. James L. Meriam. At that
time, the books represented a revolutionary transformation in undergraduate mechanics
education. They became the deﬁnitive textbooks for the decades that followed as well as
models for other engineering mechanics texts that have subsequently appeared. Published
under slightly different titles prior to the 1978 First Editions, this textbook series has always been characterized by logical organization, clear and rigorous presentation of the theory, instructive sample problems, and a rich collection of real-life problems, all with a high
standard of illustration. In addition to the U.S. versions, the books have appeared in SI versions and have been translated into many foreign languages. These texts collectively represent an international standard for undergraduate texts in mechanics.
The innovations and contributions of Dr. Meriam (1917–2000) to the ﬁeld of engineering mechanics cannot be overstated. He was one of the premier engineering educators of
the second half of the twentieth century. Dr. Meriam earned his B.E., M. Eng., and Ph.D.
degrees from Yale University. He had early industrial experience with Pratt and Whitney
Aircraft and the General Electric Company. During the Second World War he served in the
U.S. Coast Guard. He was a member of the faculty of the University of California–Berkeley,
Dean of Engineering at Duke University, a faculty member at the California Polytechnic
State University–San Luis Obispo, and visiting professor at the University of California–
Santa Barbara, ﬁnally retiring in 1990. Professor Meriam always placed great emphasis on
teaching, and this trait was recognized by his students wherever he taught. At Berkeley in
1963, he was the ﬁrst recipient of the Outstanding Faculty Award of Tau Beta Pi, given primarily for excellence in teaching. In 1978, he received the Distinguished Educator Award
for Outstanding Service to Engineering Mechanics Education from the American Society
for Engineering Education, and in 1992 was the Society’s recipient of the Benjamin Garver
Lamme Award, which is ASEE’s highest annual national award.
Dr. L. Glenn Kraige, coauthor of the Engineering Mechanics series since the early
1980s, has also made signiﬁcant contributions to mechanics education. Dr. Kraige earned
his B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees at the University of Virginia, principally in aerospace engineering, and he currently serves as Professor of Engineering Science and Mechanics at
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University. During the mid-1970s, I had the singular
v

vi

Foreword

pleasure of chairing Professor Kraige’s graduate committee and take particular pride in the
fact that he was the ﬁrst of my forty-ﬁve Ph.D. graduates. Professor Kraige was invited by
Professor Meriam to team with him and thereby ensure that the Meriam legacy of textbook
authorship excellence was carried forward to future generations. For the past three
decades, this highly successful team of authors has made an enormous and global impact on
the education of several generations of engineers.
In addition to his widely recognized research and publications in the ﬁeld of spacecraft
dynamics, Professor Kraige has devoted his attention to the teaching of mechanics at both
introductory and advanced levels. His outstanding teaching has been widely recognized and
has earned him teaching awards at the departmental, college, university, state, regional, and
national levels. These include the Francis J. Maher Award for excellence in education in the
Department of Engineering Science and Mechanics, the Wine Award for excellence in university teaching, and the Outstanding Educator Award from the State Council of Higher
Education for the Commonwealth of Virginia. In 1996, the Mechanics Division of ASEE
bestowed upon him the Archie Higdon Distinguished Educator Award. The Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching and the Council for Advancement and Support of
Education awarded him the distinction of Virginia Professor of the Year for 1997. During
2004–2006, he held the W. S. “Pete” White Chair for Innovation in Engineering Education,
and in 2006 he teamed with Professors Scott L. Hendricks and Don H. Morris as recipients of
the XCaliber Award for Teaching with Technology. In his teaching, Professor Kraige stresses
the development of analytical capabilities along with the strengthening of physical insight and
engineering judgment. Since the early 1980s, he has worked on personal-computer software
designed to enhance the teaching/learning process in statics, dynamics, strength of materials,
and higher-level areas of dynamics and vibrations.
The Seventh Edition of Engineering Mechanics continues the same high standards set
by previous editions and adds new features of help and interest to students. It contains a
vast collection of interesting and instructive problems. The faculty and students privileged
to teach or study from Professors Meriam and Kraige’s Engineering Mechanics will beneﬁt
from the several decades of investment by two highly accomplished educators. Following
the pattern of the previous editions, this textbook stresses the application of theory to
actual engineering situations, and at this important task it remains the best.

John L. Junkins
Distinguished Professor of Aerospace Engineering
Holder of the George J. Eppright Chair Professorship in Engineering
Texas A&M University
College Station, Texas

Preface

Engineering mechanics is both a foundation and a framework for most of the branches
of engineering. Many of the topics in such areas as civil, mechanical, aerospace, and agricultural engineering, and of course engineering mechanics itself, are based upon the subjects
of statics and dynamics. Even in a discipline such as electrical engineering, practitioners, in
the course of considering the electrical components of a robotic device or a manufacturing
process, may ﬁnd themselves ﬁrst having to deal with the mechanics involved.
Thus, the engineering mechanics sequence is critical to the engineering curriculum.
Not only is this sequence needed in itself, but courses in engineering mechanics also serve
to solidify the student’s understanding of other important subjects, including applied mathematics, physics, and graphics. In addition, these courses serve as excellent settings in
which to strengthen problem-solving abilities.

Philosophy
The primary purpose of the study of engineering mechanics is to develop the capacity
to predict the effects of force and motion while carrying out the creative design functions
of engineering. This capacity requires more than a mere knowledge of the physical and
mathematical principles of mechanics; also required is the ability to visualize physical conﬁgurations in terms of real materials, actual constraints, and the practical limitations
which govern the behavior of machines and structures. One of the primary objectives in a
mechanics course is to help the student develop this ability to visualize, which is so vital to
problem formulation. Indeed, the construction of a meaningful mathematical model is
often a more important experience than its solution. Maximum progress is made when the
principles and their limitations are learned together within the context of engineering
application.
There is a frequent tendency in the presentation of mechanics to use problems mainly
as a vehicle to illustrate theory rather than to develop theory for the purpose of solving
problems. When the ﬁrst view is allowed to predominate, problems tend to become overly
idealized and unrelated to engineering with the result that the exercise becomes dull, academic, and uninteresting. This approach deprives the student of valuable experience in formulating problems and thus of discovering the need for and meaning of theory. The second
vii

viii

Preface

view provides by far the stronger motive for learning theory and leads to a better balance
between theory and application. The crucial role played by interest and purpose in providing the strongest possible motive for learning cannot be overemphasized.
Furthermore, as mechanics educators, we should stress the understanding that, at best,
theory can only approximate the real world of mechanics rather than the view that the real
world approximates the theory. This difference in philosophy is indeed basic and distinguishes
the engineering of mechanics from the science of mechanics.
Over the past several decades, several unfortunate tendencies have occurred in engineering education. First, emphasis on the geometric and physical meanings of prerequisite mathematics appears to have diminished. Second, there has been a signiﬁcant reduction and even
elimination of instruction in graphics, which in the past enhanced the visualization and representation of mechanics problems. Third, in advancing the mathematical level of our treatment of mechanics, there has been a tendency to allow the notational manipulation of vector
operations to mask or replace geometric visualization. Mechanics is inherently a subject
which depends on geometric and physical perception, and we should increase our efforts to
develop this ability.
A special note on the use of computers is in order. The experience of formulating problems, where reason and judgment are developed, is vastly more important for the student
than is the manipulative exercise in carrying out the solution. For this reason, computer
usage must be carefully controlled. At present, constructing free-body diagrams and formulating governing equations are best done with pencil and paper. On the other hand, there
are instances in which the solution to the governing equations can best be carried out and
displayed using the computer. Computer-oriented problems should be genuine in the sense
that there is a condition of design or criticality to be found, rather than “makework” problems in which some parameter is varied for no apparent reason other than to force artiﬁcial
use of the computer. These thoughts have been kept in mind during the design of the
computer-oriented problems in the Seventh Edition. To conserve adequate time for problem
formulation, it is suggested that the student be assigned only a limited number of the
computer-oriented problems.
As with previous editions, this Seventh Edition of Engineering Mechanics is written with
the foregoing philosophy in mind. It is intended primarily for the ﬁrst engineering course in
mechanics, generally taught in the second year of study. Engineering Mechanics is written in
a style which is both concise and friendly. The major emphasis is on basic principles and
methods rather than on a multitude of special cases. Strong effort has been made to show both
the cohesiveness of the relatively few fundamental ideas and the great variety of problems
which these few ideas will solve.

Pedagogical Features
The basic structure of this textbook consists of an article which rigorously treats the particular subject matter at hand, followed by one or more Sample Problems, followed by a group
of Problems. There is a Chapter Review at the end of each chapter which summarizes the main
points in that chapter, followed by a Review Problem set.

Problems
The 89 Sample Problems appear on specially colored pages by themselves. The solutions to typical statics problems are presented in detail. In addition, explanatory and
cautionary notes (Helpful Hints) in blue type are number-keyed to the main presentation.
There are 1058 homework exercises, of which approximately 50 percent are new to the
Seventh Edition. The problem sets are divided into Introductory Problems and Representative

Preface

Problems. The ﬁrst section consists of simple, uncomplicated problems designed to help students gain conﬁdence with the new topic, while most of the problems in the second section are
of average difﬁculty and length. The problems are generally arranged in order of increasing
difﬁculty. More difﬁcult exercises appear near the end of the Representative Problems and are
marked with the symbol ᭤. Computer-Oriented Problems, marked with an asterisk, appear in
a special section at the conclusion of the Review Problems at the end of each chapter. The answers to all problems have been provided in a special section near the end of the textbook.
In recognition of the need for emphasis on SI units, there are approximately two problems in SI units for every one in U.S. customary units. This apportionment between the two
sets of units permits anywhere from a 50–50 emphasis to a 100-percent SI treatment.
A notable feature of the Seventh Edition, as with all previous editions, is the wealth of
interesting and important problems which apply to engineering design. Whether directly
identiﬁed as such or not, virtually all of the problems deal with principles and procedures
inherent in the design and analysis of engineering structures and mechanical systems.

Illustrations
In order to bring the greatest possible degree of realism and clarity to the illustrations,
this textbook series continues to be produced in full color. It is important to note that color
is used consistently for the identiﬁcation of certain quantities:

• red for forces and moments
• green for velocity and acceleration arrows
• orange dashes for selected trajectories of moving points
Subdued colors are used for those parts of an illustration which are not central to the
problem at hand. Whenever possible, mechanisms or objects which commonly have a certain color will be portrayed in that color. All of the fundamental elements of technical illustration which have been an essential part of this Engineering Mechanics series of textbooks
have been retained. The author wishes to restate the conviction that a high standard of
illustration is critical to any written work in the ﬁeld of mechanics.

Features New to This Edition
While retaining the hallmark features of all previous editions, we have incorporated
these improvements:

• All theory portions have been reexamined in order to maximize rigor, clarity,
readability, and level of friendliness.

• Key Concepts areas within the theory presentation have been specially marked and
highlighted.

• The Chapter Reviews are highlighted and feature itemized summaries.
• Approximately 50 percent of the homework problems are new to this Seventh Edition.
All new problems have been independently solved in order to ensure a high degree of
accuracy.

• New Sample Problems have been added, including ones with computer-oriented
solutions.

• All Sample Problems are printed on specially colored pages for quick identiﬁcation.
• Within-the-chapter photographs have been added in order to provide additional
connection to actual situations in which statics has played a major role.

ix

x

Preface

Organization
In Chapter 1, the fundamental concepts necessary for the study of mechanics are
established.
In Chapter 2, the properties of forces, moments, couples, and resultants are developed
so that the student may proceed directly to the equilibrium of nonconcurrent force systems
in Chapter 3 without unnecessarily belaboring the relatively trivial problem of the equilibrium of concurrent forces acting on a particle.
In both Chapters 2 and 3, analysis of two-dimensional problems is presented in
Section A before three-dimensional problems are treated in Section B. With this arrangement, the instructor may cover all of Chapter 2 before beginning Chapter 3 on equilibrium, or the instructor may cover the two chapters in the order 2A, 3A, 2B, 3B. The latter
order treats force systems and equilibrium in two dimensions and then treats these topics
in three dimensions.
Application of equilibrium principles to simple trusses and to frames and machines is
presented in Chapter 4 with primary attention given to two-dimensional systems. A sufﬁcient number of three-dimensional examples are included, however, to enable students to
exercise more general vector tools of analysis.
The concepts and categories of distributed forces are introduced at the beginning of
Chapter 5, with the balance of the chapter divided into two main sections. Section A treats
centroids and mass centers; detailed examples are presented to help students master early
applications of calculus to physical and geometrical problems. Section B includes the special
topics of beams, ﬂexible cables, and ﬂuid forces, which may be omitted without loss of continuity of basic concepts.
Chapter 6 on friction is divided into Section A on the phenomenon of dry friction and
Section B on selected machine applications. Although Section B may be omitted if time is
limited, this material does provide a valuable experience for the student in dealing with
both concentrated and distributed friction forces.
Chapter 7 presents a consolidated introduction to virtual work with applications limited to single-degree-of-freedom systems. Special emphasis is placed on the advantage of the
virtual-work and energy method for interconnected systems and stability determination.
Virtual work provides an excellent opportunity to convince the student of the power of
mathematical analysis in mechanics.
Moments and products of inertia of areas are presented in Appendix A. This topic helps
to bridge the subjects of statics and solid mechanics. Appendix C contains a summary review of selected topics of elementary mathematics as well as several numerical techniques
which the student should be prepared to use in computer-solved problems. Useful tables of
physical constants, centroids, and moments of inertia are contained in Appendix D.

Supplements
The following items have been prepared to complement this textbook:

Instructor’s Manual
Prepared by the authors and independently checked, fully worked solutions to all odd
problems in the text are available to faculty by contacting their local Wiley representative.
Instructor Lecture Resources
The following resources are available online at www.wiley.com/college/meriam. There
may be additional resources not listed.

Preface

WileyPlus: A complete online learning system to help prepare and present lectures, assign
and manage homework, keep track of student progress, and customize your course content
and delivery. See the description at the back of the book for more information, and the website for a demonstration. Talk to your Wiley representative for details on setting up your
WileyPlus course.
Lecture software speciﬁcally designed to aid the lecturer, especially in larger classrooms. Written by the author and incorporating ﬁgures from the textbooks, this software is based on the
Macromedia Flash platform. Major use of animation, concise review of the theory, and numerous sample problems make this tool extremely useful for student self-review of the material.
All ﬁgures in the text are available in electronic format for use in creating lecture presentations.
All Sample Problems are available as electronic ﬁles for display and discussion in the
classroom.

Acknowledgments
Special recognition is due Dr. A. L. Hale, formerly of Bell Telephone Laboratories, for
his continuing contribution in the form of invaluable suggestions and accurate checking of
the manuscript. Dr. Hale has rendered similar service for all previous versions of this entire
series of mechanics books, dating back to the 1950s. He reviews all aspects of the books, including all old and new text and ﬁgures. Dr. Hale carries out an independent solution to
each new homework exercise and provides the author with suggestions and needed corrections to the solutions which appear in the Instructor’s Manual. Dr. Hale is well known for
being extremely accurate in his work, and his ﬁne knowledge of the English language is a
great asset which aids every user of this textbook.
I would like to thank the faculty members of the Department of Engineering Science
and Mechanics at VPI&SU who regularly offer constructive suggestions. These include
Saad A. Ragab, Norman E. Dowling, Michael W. Hyer, J. Wallace Grant, and Jeffrey N.
Bolton. Scott L. Hendricks has been particularly effective and accurate in his extensive
review of the manuscript.
The following individuals (listed in alphabetical order) provided feedback on recent
editions, reviewed samples of the Seventh Edition, or otherwise contributed to the Seventh
Edition:
Michael Ales, U.S. Merchant Marine Academy
Joseph Arumala, University of Maryland Eastern Shore
Eric Austin, Clemson University
Stephen Bechtel, Ohio State University
Peter Birkemoe, University of Toronto
Achala Chatterjee, San Bernardino Valley College
Jim Shih-Jiun Chen, Temple University
Yi-chao Chen, University of Houston
Mary Cooper, Cal Poly San Luis Obispo
Mukaddes Darwish, Texas Tech University
Kurt DeGoede, Elizabethtown College
John DesJardins, Clemson University
Larry DeVries, University of Utah
Craig Downing, Southeast Missouri State University

xi

xii

Preface

William Drake, Missouri State University
Raghu Echempati, Kettering University
Amelito Enriquez, Canada College
Sven Esche, Stevens Institute of Technology
Wallace Franklin, U.S. Merchant Marine Academy
Christine Goble, University of Kentucky
Barry Goodno, Georgia Institute of Technology
Robert Harder, George Fox University
Javier Hasbun, University of West Georgia
Javad Hashemi, Texas Tech University
Robert Hyers, University of Massachusetts, Amherst
Matthew Ikle, Adams State College
Duane Jardine, University of New Orleans
Mariappan Jawaharlal, California State University, Pomona
Qing Jiang, University of California, Riverside
Jennifer Kadlowec, Rowan University
Robert Kern, Milwaukee School of Engineering
John Krohn, Arkansas Tech University
Keith Lindler, United States Naval Academy
Francisco Manzo-Robledo, Washington State University
Geraldine Milano, New Jersey Institute of Technology
Saeed Niku, Cal Poly San Luis Obispo
Wilfrid Nixon, University of Iowa
Karim Nohra, University of South Florida
Vassilis Panoskaltsis, Case Western Reserve University
Chandra Putcha, California State University, Fullerton
Blayne Roeder, Purdue University
Eileen Rossman, Cal Poly San Luis Obispo
Nestor Sanchez, University of Texas, San Antonio
Scott Schiff, Clemson University
Joseph Shaefer, Iowa State University
Sergey Smirnov, Texas Tech University
Ertugrul Taciroglu, UCLA
Constantine Tarawneh, University of Texas
John Turner, University of Wyoming
Chris Venters, Virginia Tech
Sarah Vigmostad, University of Iowa
T. W. Wu, University of Kentucky
Mohammed Zikry, North Carolina State University
The contributions by the staff of John Wiley & Sons, Inc., including Editor Linda Ratts,
Senior Production Editor Sujin Hong, Senior Designer Maureen Eide, and Senior Photograph
Editor Lisa Gee, reﬂect a high degree of professional competence and are duly recognized.
I wish to especially acknowledge the critical production efforts of Christine Cervoni of
Camelot Editorial Services, LLC. The talented illustrators of Precision Graphics continue to
maintain a high standard of illustration excellence.
Finally, I wish to state the extremely signiﬁcant contribution of my family. In addition to
providing patience and support for this project, my wife Dale has managed the preparation of
the manuscript for the Seventh Edition and has been a key individual in checking all stages

Preface

of the proof. In addition, both my daughter Stephanie Kokan and my son David Kraige have
contributed problem ideas, illustrations, and solutions to a number of the problems over the
past several editions.
I am extremely pleased to participate in extending the time duration of this textbook
series well past the sixty-year mark. In the interest of providing you with the best possible
educational materials over future years, I encourage and welcome all comments and suggestions. Please address your comments to kraige@vt.edu.

Blacksburg, Virginia

xiii

xiv

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces

Contents

CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION TO STATICS

3

1/1

Mechanics

3

1/2

Basic Concepts

4

1/3

Scalars and Vectors

4

1/4

Newton’s Laws

7

1/5

Units

8

1/6

Law of Gravitation

12

1/7

Accuracy, Limits, and Approximations

13

1/8

Problem Solving in Statics

14

1/9

Chapter Review

18

CHAPTER 2
FORCE SYSTEMS

23

2/1

Introduction

23

2/2

Force

23

SECTION A

TWO-DIMENSIONAL FORCE SYSTEMS

26

2/3

26

2/4

Moment

38

2/5

Couple

50

2/6
xiv

Rectangular Components

Resultants

58

Contents

SECTION B

THREE-DIMENSIONAL FORCE SYSTEMS

66

2/7

Rectangular Components

66

2/8

Moment and Couple

74

2/9

Resultants

88

2/10

Chapter Review

99

CHAPTER 3
EQUILIBRIUM

109

3/1

109

Introduction

SECTION A

EQUILIBRIUM IN TWO DIMENSIONS

110

3/2

System Isolation and the Free-Body Diagram

110

3/3

Equilibrium Conditions

121

SECTION B

EQUILIBRIUM IN THREE DIMENSIONS

145

3/4

Equilibrium Conditions

145

3/5

Chapter Review

163

CHAPTER 4
STRUCTURES

173

4/1

Introduction

173

4/2

Plane Trusses

175

4/3

Method of Joints

176

4/4

Method of Sections

188

4/5

Space Trusses

197

4/6

Frames and Machines

204

4/7

Chapter Review

224

CHAPTER 5
DISTRIBUTED FORCES

233

5/1

233

Introduction

SECTION A

CENTERS OF MASS AND CENTROIDS

235

5/2

Center of Mass

235

5/3

Centroids of Lines, Areas, and Volumes

238

5/4

Composite Bodies and Figures; Approximations

254

5/5

Theorems of Pappus

264

xv

xvi

Contents

SECTION B

SPECIAL TOPICS

272

5/6

Beams—External Effects

272

5/7

Beams—Internal Effects

279

5/8

Flexible Cables

291

5/9

Fluid Statics

306

5/10

Chapter Review

325

CHAPTER 6
FRICTION
6/1

335
Introduction

SECTION A

FRICTIONAL PHENOMENA

335
336

6/2

Types of Friction

336

6/3

Dry Friction

337

SECTION B

APPLICATIONS OF FRICTION IN MACHINES

357

6/4

Wedges

357

6/5

Screws

358

6/6

Journal Bearings

368

6/7

Thrust Bearings; Disk Friction

369

6/8

Flexible Belts

377

6/9

Rolling Resistance

378

6/10

Chapter Review

387

CHAPTER 7
VIRTUAL WORK

397

7/1

Introduction

397

7/2

Work

397

7/3

Equilibrium

401

7/4

Potential Energy and Stability

417

7/5

Chapter Review

433

APPENDICES
APPENDIX A

AREA MOMENTS OF INERTIA

441

A/1

Introduction

441

A/2

Deﬁnitions

442

Contents

A/3

Composite Areas

456

A/4

Products of Inertia and Rotation of Axes

464

APPENDIX B

MASS MOMENTS OF INERTIA

477

APPENDIX C

SELECTED TOPICS OF MATHEMATICS

479

C/1

Introduction

479

C/2

Plane Geometry

479

C/3

Solid Geometry

480

C/4

Algebra

480

C/5

Analytic Geometry

481

C/6

Trigonometry

481

C/7

Vector Operations

482

C/8

Series

485

C/9

Derivatives

485

C/10

Integrals

486

C/11

Newton’s Method for Solving Intractable Equations

489

C/12

Selected Techniques for Numerical Integration

491

APPENDIX D

USEFUL TABLES

495

Table D/1

Physical Properties

495

Table D/2

Solar System Constants

496

Table D/3

Properties of Plane Figures

497

Table D/4

Properties of Homogeneous Solids

499

INDEX

503

PROBLEM ANSWERS

507

xvii

This page intentionally left blank

Engineering Mechanics
Volume 1

Statics
Seventh Edition

Structures which support large forces must be designed with the principles of mechanics foremost in mind.
In this view of New York, one can see a variety of such structures.
© fotoVoyager/iStockphoto

1

Introduction
to Statics
CHAPTER OUTLINE
1/1 Mechanics

1/6 Law of Gravitation

1/2 Basic Concepts

1/7 Accuracy, Limits, and Approximations

1/3 Scalars and Vectors

1/8 Problem Solving in Statics

1/4 Newton’s Laws

1/9 Chapter Review

1/5 Units

Mechanics

Mechanics is the physical science which deals with the effects of
forces on objects. No other subject plays a greater role in engineering
analysis than mechanics. Although the principles of mechanics are few,
they have wide application in engineering. The principles of mechanics
are central to research and development in the ﬁelds of vibrations, stability and strength of structures and machines, robotics, rocket and
spacecraft design, automatic control, engine performance, ﬂuid ﬂow,
electrical machines and apparatus, and molecular, atomic, and subatomic behavior. A thorough understanding of this subject is an essential prerequisite for work in these and many other ﬁelds.
Mechanics is the oldest of the physical sciences. The early history of
this subject is synonymous with the very beginnings of engineering. The
earliest recorded writings in mechanics are those of Archimedes
(287–212 B.C.) on the principle of the lever and the principle of buoyancy. Substantial progress came later with the formulation of the laws
of vector combination of forces by Stevinus (1548–1620), who also formulated most of the principles of statics. The ﬁrst investigation of a dynamics problem is credited to Galileo (1564–1642) for his experiments
with falling stones. The accurate formulation of the laws of motion, as
well as the law of gravitation, was made by Newton (1642–1727), who
also conceived the idea of the inﬁnitesimal in mathematical analysis.
Substantial contributions to the development of mechanics were also
made by da Vinci, Varignon, Euler, D’Alembert, Lagrange, Laplace, and
Sir Isaac Newton
others.
In this book we will be concerned with both the development of the
principles of mechanics and their application. The principles of mechanics as a science are rigorously expressed by mathematics, and thus

© S. Terry/Photo Researchers, Inc.

1/1

3

4

Chapter 1

Introduction to Statics

mathematics plays an important role in the application of these principles to the solution of practical problems.
The subject of mechanics is logically divided into two parts: statics,
which concerns the equilibrium of bodies under action of forces, and
dynamics, which concerns the motion of bodies. Engineering Mechanics is divided into these two parts, Vol. 1 Statics and Vol. 2 Dynamics.

1/2

Basic Concepts

The following concepts and deﬁnitions are basic to the study of mechanics, and they should be understood at the outset.
Space is the geometric region occupied by bodies whose positions
are described by linear and angular measurements relative to a coordinate system. For three-dimensional problems, three independent coordinates are needed. For two-dimensional problems, only two coordinates
are required.
Time is the measure of the succession of events and is a basic quantity in dynamics. Time is not directly involved in the analysis of statics
problems.
Mass is a measure of the inertia of a body, which is its resistance to
a change of velocity. Mass can also be thought of as the quantity of matter in a body. The mass of a body affects the gravitational attraction
force between it and other bodies. This force appears in many applications in statics.
Force is the action of one body on another. A force tends to move a
body in the direction of its action. The action of a force is characterized
by its magnitude, by the direction of its action, and by its point of application. Thus force is a vector quantity, and its properties are discussed
in detail in Chapter 2.
A particle is a body of negligible dimensions. In the mathematical
sense, a particle is a body whose dimensions are considered to be near
zero so that we may analyze it as a mass concentrated at a point. We
often choose a particle as a differential element of a body. We may treat
a body as a particle when its dimensions are irrelevant to the description of its position or the action of forces applied to it.
Rigid body. A body is considered rigid when the change in distance
between any two of its points is negligible for the purpose at hand. For
instance, the calculation of the tension in the cable which supports the
boom of a mobile crane under load is essentially unaffected by the small
internal deformations in the structural members of the boom. For the
purpose, then, of determining the external forces which act on the boom,
we may treat it as a rigid body. Statics deals primarily with the calculation of external forces which act on rigid bodies in equilibrium. Determination of the internal deformations belongs to the study of the mechanics
of deformable bodies, which normally follows statics in the curriculum.

1/3

Scalars and Vectors

We use two kinds of quantities in mechanics—scalars and vectors.
Scalar quantities are those with which only a magnitude is associated.
Examples of scalar quantities are time, volume, density, speed, energy,

Article 1/3

Scalars and Vectors

and mass. Vector quantities, on the other hand, possess direction as well
as magnitude, and must obey the parallelogram law of addition as described later in this article. Examples of vector quantities are displacement, velocity, acceleration, force, moment, and momentum. Speed is a
scalar. It is the magnitude of velocity, which is a vector. Thus velocity is
speciﬁed by a direction as well as a speed.
Vectors representing physical quantities can be classiﬁed as free,
sliding, or ﬁxed.
A free vector is one whose action is not conﬁned to or associated
with a unique line in space. For example, if a body moves without rotation, then the movement or displacement of any point in the body may
be taken as a vector. This vector describes equally well the direction and
magnitude of the displacement of every point in the body. Thus, we may
represent the displacement of such a body by a free vector.
A sliding vector has a unique line of action in space but not a
unique point of application. For example, when an external force acts on
a rigid body, the force can be applied at any point along its line of action
without changing its effect on the body as a whole,* and thus it is a sliding vector.
A ﬁxed vector is one for which a unique point of application is
speciﬁed. The action of a force on a deformable or nonrigid body must be
speciﬁed by a ﬁxed vector at the point of application of the force. In this
instance the forces and deformations within the body depend on the
point of application of the force, as well as on its magnitude and line of
action.

Conventions for Equations and Diagrams
A vector quantity V is represented by a line segment, Fig. 1/1, having the direction of the vector and having an arrowhead to indicate the
sense. The length of the directed line segment represents to some convenient scale the magnitude ͉V͉ of the vector, which is printed with lightface italic type V. For example, we may choose a scale such that an
arrow one inch long represents a force of twenty pounds.
In scalar equations, and frequently on diagrams where only the
magnitude of a vector is labeled, the symbol will appear in lightface
italic type. Boldface type is used for vector quantities whenever the directional aspect of the vector is a part of its mathematical representation. When writing vector equations, always be certain to preserve the
mathematical distinction between vectors and scalars. In handwritten
work, use a distinguishing mark for each l
vector quantity, such as an underline, V, or an arrow over the symbol, V, to take the place of boldface
type in print.
Working with Vectors
The direction of the vector V may be measured by an angle ␪ from
some known reference direction as shown in Fig. 1/1. The negative of V
is a vector ϪV having the same magnitude as V but directed in the
sense opposite to V, as shown in Fig. 1/1.
*This is the principle of transmissibility, which is discussed in Art. 2/2.

V

θ
–V

Figure 1/1

5

6

Chapter 1

Introduction to Statics

V

V2

V

V2

V2
V1

V1
(b)

(a)

V1
(c)

Figure 1/2
Vectors must obey the parallelogram law of combination. This law
states that two vectors V1 and V2, treated as free vectors, Fig. 1/2a, may
be replaced by their equivalent vector V, which is the diagonal of the
parallelogram formed by V1 and V2 as its two sides, as shown in Fig.
1/2b. This combination is called the vector sum, and is represented by
the vector equation
V ϭ V1 ϩ V2

V1

where the plus sign, when used with the vector quantities (in boldface
type), means vector and not scalar addition. The scalar sum of the magnitudes of the two vectors is written in the usual way as V1 ϩ V2. The
geometry of the parallelogram shows that V V1 ϩ V2.
The two vectors V1 and V2, again treated as free vectors, may also be
added head-to-tail by the triangle law, as shown in Fig. 1/2c, to obtain the
identical vector sum V. We see from the diagram that the order of addition of the vectors does not affect their sum, so that V1 ϩ V2 ϭ V2 ϩ V1.
The difference V1 Ϫ V2 between the two vectors is easily obtained
by adding ϪV2 to V1 as shown in Fig. 1/3, where either the triangle or
parallelogram procedure may be used. The difference VЈ between the
two vectors is expressed by the vector equation

V1
–V2

V′

–V2
V′

Figure 1/3

VЈ ϭ V1 Ϫ V2
where the minus sign denotes vector subtraction.
Any two or more vectors whose sum equals a certain vector V are
said to be the components of that vector. Thus, the vectors V1 and V2 in
Fig. 1/4a are the components of V in the directions 1 and 2, respectively.
It is usually most convenient to deal with vector components which are
mutually perpendicular; these are called rectangular components. The
y′
y

2
V
Vy

V2
V1
(a)

1

V

V
Vy′

θ
Vx
(b)

Figure 1/4

x
Vx′
(c)

x′

Article 1/4

Newton’s Laws

7

vectors Vx and Vy in Fig. 1/4b are the x- and y-components, respectively,
of V. Likewise, in Fig. 1/4c, VxЈ and VyЈ are the xЈ- and yЈ-components of
V. When expressed in rectangular components, the direction of the vector with respect to, say, the x-axis is clearly speciﬁed by the angle ␪,
where
␪ ϭ tanϪ1

Vy
Vx

A vector V may be expressed mathematically by multiplying its
magnitude V by a vector n whose magnitude is one and whose direction
coincides with that of V. The vector n is called a unit vector. Thus,
V ϭ Vn
In this way both the magnitude and direction of the vector are conveniently contained in one mathematical expression. In many problems,
particularly three-dimensional ones, it is convenient to express the rectangular components of V, Fig. 1/5, in terms of unit vectors i, j, and k,
which are vectors in the x-, y-, and z-directions, respectively, with unit
magnitudes. Because the vector V is the vector sum of the components
in the x-, y-, and z-directions, we can express V as follows:

z
k
V

Vzk

V ϭ V xi ϩ V y j ϩ V z k
We now make use of the direction cosines l, m, and n of V, which are deﬁned by
m ϭ cos ␪y

l ϭ cos ␪x

n ϭ cos ␪z

Thus, we may write the magnitudes of the components of V as
Vx ϭ lV

Vy ϭ mV

Vz ϭ nV

where, from the Pythagorean theorem,
V 2 ϭ V x 2 ϩ Vy 2 ϩ V z 2
Note that this relation implies that l2 ϩ m2 ϩ n2 ϭ 1.

1/4

Newton’s Laws

Sir Isaac Newton was the ﬁrst to state correctly the basic laws governing the motion of a particle and to demonstrate their validity.*
Slightly reworded with modern terminology, these laws are:
Law I. A particle remains at rest or continues to move with uniform
velocity (in a straight line with a constant speed) if there is no unbalanced force acting on it.
*Newton’s original formulations may be found in the translation of his Principia (1687) revised by F. Cajori, University of California Press, 1934.

j

θy

θz

θx

Vy j

Vx i
i

x

Figure 1/5

y

8

Chapter 1

Introduction to Statics

Law II. The acceleration of a particle is proportional to the vector
sum of forces acting on it, and is in the direction of this vector sum.
Law III. The forces of action and reaction between interacting bodies are equal in magnitude, opposite in direction, and collinear (they lie
on the same line).
The correctness of these laws has been veriﬁed by innumerable accurate physical measurements. Newton’s second law forms the basis for
most of the analysis in dynamics. As applied to a particle of mass m, it
may be stated as
F ϭ ma

(1/1)

where F is the vector sum of forces acting on the particle and a is the resulting acceleration. This equation is a vector equation because the direction of F must agree with the direction of a, and the magnitudes of F
and ma must be equal.
Newton’s ﬁrst law contains the principle of the equilibrium of
forces, which is the main topic of concern in statics. This law is actually
a consequence of the second law, since there is no acceleration when the
force is zero, and the particle either is at rest or is moving with a uniform velocity. The ﬁrst law adds nothing new to the description of motion but is included here because it was part of Newton’s classical
statements.
The third law is basic to our understanding of force. It states that
forces always occur in pairs of equal and opposite forces. Thus, the
downward force exerted on the desk by the pencil is accompanied by an
upward force of equal magnitude exerted on the pencil by the desk. This
principle holds for all forces, variable or constant, regardless of their
source, and holds at every instant of time during which the forces are
applied. Lack of careful attention to this basic law is the cause of frequent error by the beginner.
In the analysis of bodies under the action of forces, it is absolutely
necessary to be clear about which force of each action–reaction pair is
being considered. It is necessary ﬁrst of all to isolate the body under consideration and then to consider only the one force of the pair which acts
on the body in question.

1/5

Units

In mechanics we use four fundamental quantities called dimensions.
These are length, mass, force, and time. The units used to measure these
quantities cannot all be chosen independently because they must be consistent with Newton’s second law, Eq. 1/1. Although there are a number
of different systems of units, only the two systems most commonly used
in science and technology will be used in this text. The four fundamental
dimensions and their units and symbols in the two systems are summarized in the following table.

Article 1/5

QUANTITY
Mass
Length
Time
Force

SI UNITS

DIMENSIONAL
SYMBOL
M
L
T
F

UNIT
Base
units

kilogram
meter
second
newton

SYMBOL
kg
m
s
N

N ϭ kg ⅐ m/s2
Thus, 1 newton is the force required to give a mass of 1 kg an acceleration of 1 m/s2.
Consider a body of mass m which is allowed to fall freely near the
surface of the earth. With only the force of gravitation acting on the
body, it falls with an acceleration g toward the center of the earth. This
gravitational force is the weight W of the body, and is found from Eq. 1/1:
W (N) ϭ m (kg) ϫ g (m/s2)

U.S. Customary Units
The U.S. customary, or British system of units, also called the footpound-second (FPS) system, has been the common system in business
and industry in English-speaking countries. Although this system will
in time be replaced by SI units, for many more years engineers must be
able to work with both SI units and FPS units, and both systems are
used freely in Engineering Mechanics.
As shown in the table, in the U.S. or FPS system, the units of feet
(ft) for length, seconds (sec) for time, and pounds (lb) for force are selected as base units, and the slug for mass is derived from Eq. 1/1. Thus,
force (lb) ϭ mass (slugs) ϫ acceleration (ft/sec2), or
lb-sec2
ft

Therefore, 1 slug is the mass which is given an acceleration of 1 ft/sec2
when acted on by a force of 1 lb. If W is the gravitational force or weight
and g is the acceleration due to gravity, Eq. 1/1 gives
m (slugs) ϭ

W (lb)
g (ft/sec2)

9

U.S. CUSTOMARY UNITS

SI Units
The International System of Units, abbreviated SI (from the
French, Système International d’Unités), is accepted in the United
States and throughout the world, and is a modern version of the metric
system. By international agreement, SI units will in time replace other
systems. As shown in the table, in SI, the units kilogram (kg) for mass,
meter (m) for length, and second (s) for time are selected as the base
units, and the newton (N) for force is derived from the preceding three
by Eq. 1/1. Thus, force (N) ϭ mass (kg) ϫ acceleration (m/s2) or

slug ϭ

Units

UNIT

Base
units

slug
foot
second
pound

SYMBOL
—
ft
sec
lb

10

Chapter 1

Introduction to Statics

Note that seconds is abbreviated as s in SI units, and as sec in FPS
units.
In U.S. units the pound is also used on occasion as a unit of mass,
especially to specify thermal properties of liquids and gases. When distinction between the two units is necessary, the force unit is frequently
written as lbf and the mass unit as lbm. In this book we use almost exclusively the force unit, which is written simply as lb. Other common
units of force in the U.S. system are the kilopound (kip), which equals
1000 lb, and the ton, which equals 2000 lb.
The International System of Units (SI) is termed an absolute system
because the measurement of the base quantity mass is independent of
its environment. On the other hand, the U.S. system (FPS) is termed a
gravitational system because its base quantity force is deﬁned as the
gravitational attraction (weight) acting on a standard mass under speciﬁed conditions (sea level and 45Њ latitude). A standard pound is also the
force required to give a one-pound mass an acceleration of 32.1740
ft/sec2.
In SI units the kilogram is used exclusively as a unit of mass—never
force. In the MKS (meter, kilogram, second) gravitational system, which
has been used for many years in non-English-speaking countries, the
kilogram, like the pound, has been used both as a unit of force and as a
unit of mass.

Primary Standards
Primary standards for the measurements of mass, length, and time
have been established by international agreement and are as follows:

© Omikron/Photo Researchers, Inc.

Mass. The kilogram is defined as the mass of a specific platinum–
iridium cylinder which is kept at the International Bureau of Weights
and Measures near Paris, France. An accurate copy of this cylinder is
kept in the United States at the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST), formerly the National Bureau of Standards, and
serves as the standard of mass for the United States.
Length. The meter, originally deﬁned as one ten-millionth of the
distance from the pole to the equator along the meridian through Paris,
was later deﬁned as the length of a speciﬁc platinum–iridium bar kept at
the International Bureau of Weights and Measures. The difﬁculty of accessing the bar and reproducing accurate measurements prompted the
adoption of a more accurate and reproducible standard of length for the
meter, which is now deﬁned as 1 650 763.73 wavelengths of a speciﬁc radiation of the krypton-86 atom.

The standard kilogram

Time. The second was originally deﬁned as the fraction 1/(86 400)
of the mean solar day. However, irregularities in the earth’s rotation led
to difﬁculties with this deﬁnition, and a more accurate and reproducible
standard has been adopted. The second is now deﬁned as the duration of
9 192 631 770 periods of the radiation of a speciﬁc state of the cesium133 atom.
For most engineering work, and for our purpose in studying mechanics, the accuracy of these standards is considerably beyond our

Article 1/5

needs. The standard value for gravitational acceleration g is its value at
sea level and at a 45Њ latitude. In the two systems these values are
SI units

g ϭ 9.806 65 m/s2

U.S. units

g ϭ 32.1740 ft/sec2

The approximate values of 9.81 m/s2 and 32.2 ft/sec2, respectively, are
sufﬁciently accurate for the vast majority of engineering calculations.

Unit Conversions
The characteristics of SI units are shown inside the front cover of
this book, along with the numerical conversions between U.S. customary and SI units. In addition, charts giving the approximate conversions
between selected quantities in the two systems appear inside the back
cover for convenient reference. Although these charts are useful for obtaining a feel for the relative size of SI and U.S. units, in time engineers
will ﬁnd it essential to think directly in terms of SI units without converting from U.S. units. In statics we are primarily concerned with the
units of length and force, with mass needed only when we compute gravitational force, as explained previously.
Figure 1/6 depicts examples of force, mass, and length in the two
systems of units, to aid in visualizing their relative magnitudes.

FORCE

MASS

9.81 N
(2.20 lbf)

1 kg
(2.20 lbm)

1 lbf
(4.45 N)

1 lbm
(0.454 kg)

1 ft

LENGTH

32.2 lbf
(143.1 N)

1 slug or 32.2 lbm
(14.59 kg)

(0.305 m)
1m
(3.28 ft)

Figure 1/6

Units

11

12

Chapter 1

Introduction to Statics

1/6

Law of Gravitation

In statics as well as dynamics we often need to compute the weight
of a body, which is the gravitational force acting on it. This computation
depends on the law of gravitation, which was also formulated by Newton. The law of gravitation is expressed by the equation
FϭG

m1m2

(1/2)

r2

where F ϭ the mutual force of attraction between two particles
G ϭ a universal constant known as the constant of gravitation
m1, m2 ϭ the masses of the two particles
r ϭ the distance between the centers of the particles

NASA Marshall Space Flight Center (NASA-MSFC)

The mutual forces F obey the law of action and reaction, since they are
equal and opposite and are directed along the line joining the centers of
the particles, as shown in Fig. 1/7. By experiment the gravitational constant is found to be G ϭ 6.673(10Ϫ11) m3/(kg ⅐ s2).

The gravitational force which the earth
exerts on the moon (foreground) is a
key factor in the motion of the moon.

Gravitational Attraction of the Earth
Gravitational forces exist between every pair of bodies. On the surface of the earth the only gravitational force of appreciable magnitude is
the force due to the attraction of the earth. For example, each of two
iron spheres 100 mm in diameter is attracted to the earth with a gravitational force of 37.1 N, which is its weight. On the other hand, the force
of mutual attraction between the spheres if they are just touching is
0.000 000 095 1 N. This force is clearly negligible compared with the
earth’s attraction of 37.1 N. Consequently the gravitational attraction
of the earth is the only gravitational force we need to consider for most
engineering applications on the earth’s surface.
The gravitational attraction of the earth on a body (its weight)
exists whether the body is at rest or in motion. Because this attraction is a force, the weight of a body should be expressed in newtons
(N) in SI units and in pounds (lb) in U.S. customary units. Unfortunately in common practice the mass unit kilogram (kg) has been frequently used as a measure of weight. This usage should disappear in
time as SI units become more widely used, because in SI units the
kilogram is used exclusively for mass and the newton is used for
force, including weight.
For a body of mass m near the surface of the earth, the gravitational
attraction F on the body is speciﬁed by Eq. 1/2. We usually denote the
m1

F

F

r

Figure 1/7

m2

Article 1/7

Accuracy, Limits, and Approximations

magnitude of this gravitational force or weight with the symbol W. Because the body falls with an acceleration g, Eq. 1/1 gives
W ϭ mg

(1/3)

The weight W will be in newtons (N) when the mass m is in kilograms
(kg) and the acceleration of gravity g is in meters per second squared
(m/s2). In U.S. customary units, the weight W will be in pounds (lb)
when m is in slugs and g is in feet per second squared. The standard values for g of 9.81 m/s2 and 32.2 ft/sec2 will be sufﬁciently accurate for our
calculations in statics.
The true weight (gravitational attraction) and the apparent weight
(as measured by a spring scale) are slightly different. The difference,
which is due to the rotation of the earth, is quite small and will be neglected. This effect will be discussed in Vol. 2 Dynamics.

1/7

Accuracy, Limits, and Approximations

The number of signiﬁcant ﬁgures in an answer should be no greater
than the number of ﬁgures justiﬁed by the accuracy of the given data.
For example, suppose the 24-mm side of a square bar was measured to
the nearest millimeter, so we know the side length to two signiﬁcant ﬁgures. Squaring the side length gives an area of 576 mm2. However, according to our rule, we should write the area as 580 mm2, using only two
signiﬁcant ﬁgures.
When calculations involve small differences in large quantities,
greater accuracy in the data is required to achieve a given accuracy in
the results. Thus, for example, it is necessary to know the numbers
4.2503 and 4.2391 to an accuracy of ﬁve signiﬁcant ﬁgures to express
their difference 0.0112 to three-ﬁgure accuracy. It is often difﬁcult in
lengthy computations to know at the outset how many signiﬁcant ﬁgures are needed in the original data to ensure a certain accuracy in the
answer. Accuracy to three signiﬁcant ﬁgures is considered satisfactory
for most engineering calculations.
In this text, answers will generally be shown to three signiﬁcant ﬁgures unless the answer begins with the digit 1, in which case the answer
will be shown to four signiﬁcant ﬁgures. For purposes of calculation,
consider all data given in this book to be exact.

Differentials
The order of differential quantities frequently causes misunderstanding in the derivation of equations. Higher-order differentials may
always be neglected compared with lower-order differentials when the
mathematical limit is approached. For example, the element of volume
⌬V of a right circular cone of altitude h and base radius r may be taken
to be a circular slice a distance x from the vertex and of thickness ⌬x.
The expression for the volume of the element is
⌬V ϭ

␲r2 2
[x ⌬x ϩ x(⌬x)2 ϩ 1(⌬x)3]
3
h2

13

14

Chapter 1

Introduction to Statics

Note that, when passing to the limit in going from ⌬V to dV and from
⌬x to dx, the terms containing (⌬x)2 and (⌬x)3 drop out, leaving merely
dV ϭ

␲r2 2
x dx
h2

which gives an exact expression when integrated.

1

θ

sin θ

cos θ

Figure 1/8

Arc length =
1 ×θ =θ

Small-Angle Approximations
When dealing with small angles, we can usually make use of simplifying approximations. Consider the right triangle of Fig. 1/8 where the
angle ␪, expressed in radians, is relatively small. If the hypotenuse is
unity, we see from the geometry of the ﬁgure that the arc length 1 ϫ ␪
and sin ␪ are very nearly the same. Also cos ␪ is close to unity. Furthermore, sin ␪ and tan ␪ have almost the same values. Thus, for small angles we may write
sin ␪ ഡ tan ␪ ഡ ␪

cos ␪ ഡ 1

provided that the angles are expressed in radians. These approximations
may be obtained by retaining only the ﬁrst terms in the series expansions for these three functions. As an example of these approximations,
for an angle of 1Њ
1Њ ϭ 0.017 453 rad
sin 1Њ ϭ 0.017 452

tan 1Њ ϭ 0.017 455
cos 1Њ ϭ 0.999 848

If a more accurate approximation is desired, the ﬁrst two terms may
be retained, and they are
sin ␪ ഡ ␪ Ϫ ␪3/6

tan ␪ ഡ ␪ ϩ ␪3/3

cos ␪ ഡ 1 Ϫ ␪2/2

where the angles must be expressed in radians. (To convert degrees to
radians, multiply the angle in degrees by ␲/180Њ.) The error in replacing
the sine by the angle for 1Њ (0.0175 rad) is only 0.005 percent. For 5Њ
(0.0873 rad) the error is 0.13 percent, and for 10Њ (0.1745 rad), the error
is still only 0.51 percent. As the angle ␪ approaches zero, the following
relations are true in the mathematical limit:
sin d␪ ϭ tan d␪ ϭ d␪

cos d␪ ϭ 1

where the differential angle d␪ must be expressed in radians.

1/8

Problem Solving in Statics

We study statics to obtain a quantitative description of forces which
act on engineering structures in equilibrium. Mathematics establishes
the relations between the various quantities involved and enables us to
predict effects from these relations. We use a dual thought process in

Article 1/8

solving statics problems: We think about both the physical situation and
the corresponding mathematical description. In the analysis of every
problem, we make a transition between the physical and the mathematical. One of the most important goals for the student is to develop the
ability to make this transition freely.

Making Appropriate Assumptions
We should recognize that the mathematical formulation of a
physical problem represents an ideal description, or model, which approximates but never quite matches the actual physical situation.
When we construct an idealized mathematical model for a given engineering problem, certain approximations will always be involved.
Some of these approximations may be mathematical, whereas others
will be physical.
For instance, it is often necessary to neglect small distances, angles,
or forces compared with large distances, angles, or forces. Suppose a
force is distributed over a small area of the body on which it acts. We
may consider it to be a concentrated force if the dimensions of the area
involved are small compared with other pertinent dimensions.
We may neglect the weight of a steel cable if the tension in the cable
is many times greater than its total weight. However, if we must calculate the deﬂection or sag of a suspended cable under the action of its
weight, we may not ignore the cable weight.
Thus, what we may assume depends on what information is desired
and on the accuracy required. We must be constantly alert to the various
assumptions called for in the formulation of real problems. The ability to
understand and make use of the appropriate assumptions in the formulation and solution of engineering problems is certainly one of the most important characteristics of a successful engineer. One of the major aims of
this book is to provide many opportunities to develop this ability through
the formulation and analysis of many practical problems involving the
principles of statics.
Using Graphics
Graphics is an important analytical tool for three reasons:
1. We use graphics to represent a physical system on paper with a
sketch or diagram. Representing a problem geometrically helps us
with its physical interpretation, especially when we must visualize
three-dimensional problems.
2. We can often obtain a graphical solution to problems more easily
than with a direct mathematical solution. Graphical solutions are
both a practical way to obtain results, and an aid in our thought
processes. Because graphics represents the physical situation and
its mathematical expression simultaneously, graphics helps us make
the transition between the two.
3. Charts or graphs are valuable aids for representing results in a form
which is easy to understand.

Problem Solving in Statics

15

16

Chapter 1

Introduction to Statics

KEY CONCEPTS
Formulating Problems and Obtaining Solutions
In statics, as in all engineering problems, we need to use a precise and
logical method for formulating problems and obtaining their solutions.
We formulate each problem and develop its solution through the following sequence of steps.
1. Formulate the problem:
(a) State the given data.
(b) State the desired result.
(c) State your assumptions and approximations.
2. Develop the solution:
(a) Draw any diagrams you need to understand the relationships.
(b) State the governing principles to be applied to your solution.
(c) Make your calculations.
(d) Ensure that your calculations are consistent with the accuracy
justiﬁed by the data.
(e) Be sure that you have used consistent units throughout your
calculations.
(f ) Ensure that your answers are reasonable in terms of magnitudes, directions, common sense, etc.
(g) Draw conclusions.
Keeping your work neat and orderly will help your thought process and
enable others to understand your work. The discipline of doing orderly
work will help you develop skill in formulation and analysis. Problems
which seem complicated at ﬁrst often become clear when you approach
them with logic and discipline.

The Free-Body Diagram
The subject of statics is based on surprisingly few fundamental concepts and involves mainly the application of these basic relations to a
variety of situations. In this application the method of analysis is all
important. In solving a problem, it is essential that the laws which apply
be carefully ﬁxed in mind and that we apply these principles literally
and exactly. In applying the principles of mechanics to analyze forces
acting on a body, it is essential that we isolate the body in question from
all other bodies so that a complete and accurate account of all forces acting on this body can be taken. This isolation should exist mentally and
should be represented on paper. The diagram of such an isolated body
with the representation of all external forces acting on it is called a freebody diagram.
The free-body-diagram method is the key to the understanding of
mechanics. This is so because the isolation of a body is the tool by which

Article 1/8

cause and effect are clearly separated, and by which our attention is
clearly focused on the literal application of a principle of mechanics. The
technique of drawing free-body diagrams is covered in Chapter 3, where
they are ﬁrst used.

Numerical Values versus Symbols
In applying the laws of statics, we may use numerical values to
represent quantities, or we may use algebraic symbols, and leave the
answer as a formula. When numerical values are used, the magnitude
of each quantity expressed in its particular units is evident at each
stage of the calculation. This is useful when we need to know the magnitude of each term.
The symbolic solution, however, has several advantages over the
numerical solution. First, the use of symbols helps to focus our attention on the connection between the physical situation and its related
mathematical description. Second, we can use a symbolic solution repeatedly for obtaining answers to the same type of problem, but having different units or numerical values. Third, a symbolic solution
enables us to make a dimensional check at every step, which is more
difficult to do when numerical values are used. In any equation representing a physical situation, the dimensions of every term on both
sides of the equation must be the same. This property is called dimensional homogeneity.
Thus, facility with both numerical and symbolic forms of solution is
essential.
Solution Methods
Solutions to the problems of statics may be obtained in one or more
of the following ways.
1. Obtain mathematical solutions by hand, using either algebraic
symbols or numerical values. We can solve most problems this
way.
2. Obtain graphical solutions for certain problems.
3. Solve problems by computer. This is useful when a large number of
equations must be solved, when a parameter variation must be
studied, or when an intractable equation must be solved.
Many problems can be solved with two or more of these methods. The
method utilized depends partly on the engineer’s preference and partly
on the type of problem to be solved. The choice of the most expedient
method of solution is an important aspect of the experience to be gained
from the problem work. There are a number of problems in Vol. 1 Statics which are designated as Computer-Oriented Problems. These problems appear at the end of the Review Problem sets and are selected to
illustrate the type of problem for which solution by computer offers a
distinct advantage.

Problem Solving in Statics

17

18

Chapter 1

Introduction to Statics

1/9

Chapter Review

This chapter has introduced the concepts, deﬁnitions, and units
used in statics, and has given an overview of the procedure used to formulate and solve problems in statics. Now that you have ﬁnished this
chapter, you should be able to do the following:
1. Express vectors in terms of unit vectors and perpendicular components, and perform vector addition and subtraction.
2. State Newton’s laws of motion.
3. Perform calculations using SI and U.S. customary units, using
appropriate accuracy.
4. Express the law of gravitation and calculate the weight of an object.
5. Apply simpliﬁcations based on differential and small-angle approximations.
6. Describe the methodology used to formulate and solve statics
problems.

Article 1/9

SAMPLE PROBLEM 1/1

Chapter Review

19

m = 1400 kg

Determine the weight in newtons of a car whose mass is 1400 kg. Convert
the mass of the car to slugs and then determine its weight in pounds.

Solution.

From relationship 1/3, we have

ᕡ

W ϭ mg ϭ 1400(9.81) ϭ 13 730 N

Ans.

From the table of conversion factors inside the front cover of the textbook, we
see that 1 slug is equal to 14.594 kg. Thus, the mass of the car in slugs is

ᕢ

m ϭ 1400 kg

΄14.594 kg΅ ϭ 95.9 slugs
1 slug

Ans.

Finally, its weight in pounds is

ᕣ

W ϭ mg ϭ (95.9)(32.2) ϭ 3090 lb

Ans.

As another route to the last result, we can convert from kg to lbm. Again using
the table inside the front cover, we have
m ϭ 1400 kg

Helpful Hints

ᕡ Our calculator indicates a result of
13 734 N. Using the rules of significant-ﬁgure display used in this textbook, we round the written result to
four signiﬁcant ﬁgures, or 13 730 N.
Had the number begun with any
digit other than 1, we would have
rounded to three signiﬁcant ﬁgures.

ᕢ A good practice with unit conversion
is to multiply by a factor such as
1 slug
, which has a value of 1,
14.594 kg
because the numerator and the denominator are equivalent. Make sure
that cancellation of the units leaves
the units desired; here the units of
kg cancel, leaving the desired units
of slug.

΄

1 lbm
΄0.45359 kg΅ ϭ 3090 lbm

The weight in pounds associated with the mass of 3090 lbm is 3090 lb, as calculated above. We recall that 1 lbm is the amount of mass which under standard
conditions has a weight of 1 lb of force. We rarely refer to the U.S. mass unit lbm
in this textbook series, but rather use the slug for mass. The sole use of slug,
rather than the unnecessary use of two units for mass, will prove to be powerful
and simple—especially in dynamics.

΅

ᕣ Note that we are using a previously calculated result (95.9 slugs). We must be sure that when a calculated number is
needed in subsequent calculations, it is retained in the calculator to its full accuracy, (95.929834 . . .) until it is needed.
This may require storing it in a register upon its initial calculation and recalling it later. We must not merely punch 95.9
into our calculator and proceed to multiply by 32.2—this practice will result in loss of numerical accuracy. Some
individuals like to place a small indication of the storage register used in the right margin of the work paper, directly
beside the number stored.

SAMPLE PROBLEM 1/2

m = 70 kg

Use Newton’s law of universal gravitation to calculate the weight of a 70-kg
person standing on the surface of the earth. Then repeat the calculation by using
W ϭ mg and compare your two results. Use Table D/2 as needed.

Solution.

ᕡ

The two results are
Wϭ

Gmem
R2

ϭ

(6.673 ⅐ 10Ϫ11)(5.976 ⅐ 1024)(70)
[6371 ⅐ 103]

W ϭ mg ϭ 70(9.81) ϭ 687 N

2

ϭ 688 N

Ans.
R

me

Ans.

The discrepancy is due to the fact that Newton’s universal gravitational law does
not take into account the rotation of the earth. On the other hand, the value g ϭ
9.81 m/s2 used in the second equation does account for the earth’s rotation. Note
that had we used the more accurate value g ϭ 9.80665 m/s2 (which likewise accounts for the earth’s rotation) in the second equation, the discrepancy would
have been larger (686 N would have been the result).

Helpful Hint

ᕡ The effective distance between the
mass centers of the two bodies involved is the radius of the earth.

20

Chapter 1

Introduction to Statics

SAMPLE PROBLEM 1/3

y

For the vectors V1 and V2 shown in the ﬁgure,

V1 = 4 units

(a) determine the magnitude S of their vector sum S ϭ V1 ϩ V2
(b) determine the angle ␣ between S and the positive x-axis
j

(c) write S as a vector in terms of the unit vectors i and j and then write a unit
vector n along the vector sum S

45°

i

x
30°

(d) determine the vector difference D ϭ V1 Ϫ V2

V2 = 3 units
y

Solution (a) We construct to scale the parallelogram shown in Fig. a for adding
V1 and V2. Using the law of cosines, we have

V1 = 4 units

S2 ϭ 32 ϩ 42 Ϫ 2(3)(4) cos 105Њ
S ϭ 5.59 units

45° 60°

45°

Ans.

α
30°

ᕡ (b) Using the law of sines for the lower triangle, we have
sin 105Њ sin(␣ ϩ 30Њ)
ϭ
5.59
4

x
105°
V2 = 3 units
(a)

sin(␣ ϩ 30Њ) ϭ 0.692
(␣ ϩ 30Њ) ϭ 43.8Њ

S

D

␣ ϭ 13.76Њ

Ans.
V1

y

(c) With knowledge of both S and ␣, we can write the vector S as

–V2

S ϭ S[i cos ␣ ϩ j sin ␣]
ϭ 5.59[i cos 13.76Њ ϩ j sin 13.76Њ] ϭ 5.43i ϩ 1.328j units

ᕢ Then

nϭ

S 5.43i ϩ 1.328j
ϭ
ϭ 0.971i ϩ 0.238j
5.59
S

x

Ans.
V2

Ans.
(b)

(d) The vector difference D is
Helpful Hints

D ϭ V1 Ϫ V2 ϭ 4(i cos 45Њ ϩ j sin 45Њ) Ϫ 3(i cos 30Њ Ϫ j sin 30Њ)
ϭ 0.230i ϩ 4.33j units
The vector D is shown in Fig. b as D ϭ V1 ϩ (ϪV2).

Ans.

ᕡ You will frequently use the laws of
cosines and sines in mechanics. See
Art. C/6 of Appendix C for a review of
these important geometric principles.

ᕢ A unit vector may always be formed
by dividing a vector by its magnitude.
Note that a unit vector is dimensionless.

Article 1/9

Problems

21

1/8

Suppose that two nondimensional quantities are exactly A ϭ 6.67 and B ϭ 1.726. Using the rules for signiﬁcant ﬁgures as stated in this chapter, express the
four quantities (A ϩ B), (A Ϫ B), (AB), and (A/B).

1/9

PROBLEMS

Compute the magnitude F of the force which the
earth exerts on the moon. Perform the calculation
ﬁrst in newtons and then convert your result to
pounds. Refer to Table D/2 for necessary physical
quantities.

1/1 Determine the angles made by the vector V ϭ 40i Ϫ
30j with the positive x- and y-axes. Write the unit
vector n in the direction of V.
1/2 Determine the magnitude of the vector sum V ϭ
V1 ϩ V2 and the angle ␪x which V makes with the
positive x-axis. Complete both graphical and algebraic solutions.
V2 = 12 units

y

V1 = 10 units

F

F

3

60°

4

x

Problem 1/2

1/3 For the given vectors V1 and V2 of Prob. 1/2, determine the magnitude of the vector difference VЈ ϭ
V2 Ϫ V1 and the angle ␪x which VЈ makes with the
positive x-axis. Complete both graphical and algebraic solutions.
1/4 A force is speciﬁed by the vector F ϭ 120i Ϫ 160j ϩ
80k lb. Calculate the angles made by F with the positive x-, y-, and z-axes.
1/5 What is the mass in both slugs and kilograms of a
3000-lb car?
1/6 From the gravitational law calculate the weight W
(gravitational force with respect to the earth) of a
90-kg man in a spacecraft traveling in a circular orbit
250 km above the earth’s surface. Express W in both
newtons and pounds.
1/7 Determine the weight in newtons of a woman whose
weight in pounds is 130. Also, find her mass in slugs
and in kilograms. Determine your own weight in
newtons.

Problem 1/9

1/10 The uniform steel and titanium spheres are positioned as shown. Determine the magnitude of the
small gravitational force of mutual attraction if r ϭ
50 mm.
r
–
2
Titanium

r

Steel
4r
Problem 1/10

1/11 Determine the percent error n in replacing the sine
and the tangent of an angle by the value of the
angle in radians for angle values of 5°, 10°, and 20°.
Explain the qualitative difference between the sine
and tangent results.

The properties of force systems must be thoroughly understood by the engineers who design
structures such as these overhead cranes.
© Media Bakery

Force Systems

2

CHAPTER OUTLINE
2/1 Introduction

Section B Three-Dimensional Force Systems

2/2 Force

2/7 Rectangular Components

Section A Two-Dimensional Force Systems

2/8 Moment and Couple

2/3 Rectangular Components

2/9 Resultants

2/4 Moment

2/10 Chapter Review

2/5 Couple
2/6 Resultants

2/1

Introduction

In this and the following chapters, we study the effects of forces
which act on engineering structures and mechanisms. The experience
gained here will help you in the study of mechanics and in other subjects such as stress analysis, design of structures and machines, and
ﬂuid ﬂow. This chapter lays the foundation for a basic understanding
not only of statics but also of the entire subject of mechanics, and you
should master this material thoroughly.

2/2

Force

Before dealing with a group or system of forces, it is necessary to
examine the properties of a single force in some detail. A force has been
deﬁned in Chapter 1 as an action of one body on another. In dynamics
we will see that a force is deﬁned as an action which tends to cause acceleration of a body. A force is a vector quantity, because its effect depends on the direction as well as on the magnitude of the action. Thus,
forces may be combined according to the parallelogram law of vector
addition.
The action of the cable tension on the bracket in Fig. 2/1a is represented in the side view, Fig. 2/1b, by the force vector P of magnitude P.
The effect of this action on the bracket depends on P, the angle ␪, and
the location of the point of application A. Changing any one of these
three speciﬁcations will alter the effect on the bracket, such as the force

23

24

Chapter 2

Force Systems

in one of the bolts which secure the bracket to the base, or the internal
force and deformation in the material of the bracket at any point. Thus,
the complete speciﬁcation of the action of a force must include its magnitude, direction, and point of application, and therefore we must treat
it as a ﬁxed vector.

θ

(a)

Cable tension
P

A

θ
P

(b)

Figure 2/1

P

B

P

A

O

C

© mrfotos/iStockphoto

Figure 2/2

The forces associated with this lifting rig must be carefully identified,
classified, and analyzed in order to
provide a safe and effective working environment.

External and Internal Effects
We can separate the action of a force on a body into two effects, external and internal. For the bracket of Fig. 2/1 the effects of P external
to the bracket are the reactive forces (not shown) exerted on the bracket
by the foundation and bolts because of the action of P. Forces external
to a body can be either applied forces or reactive forces. The effects of P
internal to the bracket are the resulting internal forces and deformations distributed throughout the material of the bracket. The relation
between internal forces and internal deformations depends on the material properties of the body and is studied in strength of materials, elasticity, and plasticity.
Principle of Transmissibility
When dealing with the mechanics of a rigid body, we ignore deformations in the body and concern ourselves with only the net external effects of external forces. In such cases, experience shows us that it is not
necessary to restrict the action of an applied force to a given point. For
example, the force P acting on the rigid plate in Fig. 2/2 may be applied
at A or at B or at any other point on its line of action, and the net external effects of P on the bracket will not change. The external effects are
the force exerted on the plate by the bearing support at O and the force
exerted on the plate by the roller support at C.
This conclusion is summarized by the principle of transmissibility,
which states that a force may be applied at any point on its given line of
action without altering the resultant effects of the force external to the
rigid body on which it acts. Thus, whenever we are interested in only
the resultant external effects of a force, the force may be treated as a
sliding vector, and we need specify only the magnitude, direction, and
line of action of the force, and not its point of application. Because this
book deals essentially with the mechanics of rigid bodies, we will treat
almost all forces as sliding vectors for the rigid body on which they act.
Force Classiﬁcation
Forces are classiﬁed as either contact or body forces. A contact force
is produced by direct physical contact; an example is the force exerted
on a body by a supporting surface. On the other hand, a body force is
generated by virtue of the position of a body within a force ﬁeld such as
a gravitational, electric, or magnetic ﬁeld. An example of a body force is
your weight.
Forces may be further classiﬁed as either concentrated or distributed. Every contact force is actually applied over a ﬁnite area and is
therefore really a distributed force. However, when the dimensions of
the area are very small compared with the other dimensions of the

Article 2/2

body, we may consider the force to be concentrated at a point with negligible loss of accuracy. Force can be distributed over an area, as in the
case of mechanical contact, over a volume when a body force such as
weight is acting, or over a line, as in the case of the weight of a suspended cable.
The weight of a body is the force of gravitational attraction distributed over its volume and may be taken as a concentrated force acting
through the center of gravity. The position of the center of gravity is frequently obvious if the body is symmetric. If the position is not obvious,
then a separate calculation, explained in Chapter 5, will be necessary to
locate the center of gravity.
We can measure a force either by comparison with other known
forces, using a mechanical balance, or by the calibrated movement of an
elastic element. All such comparisons or calibrations have as their basis
a primary standard. The standard unit of force in SI units is the newton
(N) and in the U.S. customary system is the pound (lb), as deﬁned in
Art. 1/5.

Force

R
F2

A

F1
(a)
F2
R

Action and Reaction
According to Newton’s third law, the action of a force is always accompanied by an equal and opposite reaction. It is essential to distinguish between the action and the reaction in a pair of forces. To do so,
we ﬁrst isolate the body in question and then identify the force exerted
on that body (not the force exerted by the body). It is very easy to mistakenly use the wrong force of the pair unless we distinguish carefully
between action and reaction.

F2
A

F1

F1
(b)

R
F2

Concurrent Forces
Two or more forces are said to be concurrent at a point if their lines
of action intersect at that point. The forces F1 and F2 shown in Fig. 2/3a
have a common point of application and are concurrent at the point A.
Thus, they can be added using the parallelogram law in their common
plane to obtain their sum or resultant R, as shown in Fig. 2/3a. The resultant lies in the same plane as F1 and F2.
Suppose the two concurrent forces lie in the same plane but are applied at two different points as in Fig. 2/3b. By the principle of transmissibility, we may move them along their lines of action and complete
their vector sum R at the point of concurrency A, as shown in Fig. 2/3b.
We can replace F1 and F2 with the resultant R without altering the external effects on the body upon which they act.
We can also use the triangle law to obtain R, but we need to move
the line of action of one of the forces, as shown in Fig. 2/3c. If we add the
same two forces as shown in Fig. 2/3d, we correctly preserve the magnitude and direction of R, but we lose the correct line of action, because R
obtained in this way does not pass through A. Therefore this type of
combination should be avoided.
We can express the sum of the two forces mathematically by the
vector equation
R ϭ F1 ϩ F2

A

F1
(c)

F1
A
R
F2
(d)
b
Fb
R
F2
F1
A

a
Fa

(e)

Figure 2/3

25

26

Chapter 2

Force Systems

Vector Components
In addition to combining forces to obtain their resultant, we often
need to replace a force by its vector components in directions which are
convenient for a given application. The vector sum of the components
must equal the original vector. Thus, the force R in Fig. 2/3a may be replaced by, or resolved into, two vector components F1 and F2 with the
speciﬁed directions by completing the parallelogram as shown to obtain
the magnitudes of F1 and F2.
The relationship between a force and its vector components along
given axes must not be confused with the relationship between a force
and its perpendicular* projections onto the same axes. Figure 2/3e
shows the perpendicular projections Fa and Fb of the given force R onto
axes a and b, which are parallel to the vector components F1 and F2 of
Fig. 2/3a. Figure 2/3e shows that the components of a vector are not necessarily equal to the projections of the vector onto the same axes. Furthermore, the vector sum of the projections Fa and Fb is not the vector
R, because the parallelogram law of vector addition must be used to
form the sum. The components and projections of R are equal only
when the axes a and b are perpendicular.

–F
F
F2

F1

R1

A Special Case of Vector Addition
To obtain the resultant when the two forces F1 and F2 are parallel
as in Fig. 2/4, we use a special case of addition. The two vectors are combined by ﬁrst adding two equal, opposite, and collinear forces F and ϪF
of convenient magnitude, which taken together produce no external effect on the body. Adding F1 and F to produce R1, and combining with
the sum R2 of F2 and ϪF yield the resultant R, which is correct in magnitude, direction, and line of action. This procedure is also useful for
graphically combining two forces which have a remote and inconvenient
point of concurrency because they are almost parallel.
It is usually helpful to master the analysis of force systems in two
dimensions before undertaking three-dimensional analysis. Thus the remainder of Chapter 2 is subdivided into these two categories.

R2

R1
R2
R

Figure 2/4

SECTION A TWO-DIMENSIONAL FORCE SYSTEMS
2/3
y

Rectangular Components

The most common two-dimensional resolution of a force vector is
into rectangular components. It follows from the parallelogram rule
that the vector F of Fig. 2/5 may be written as

j
F

F ϭ Fx ϩ Fy

Fy
θ

x
Fx

i

Figure 2/5

(2/1)

where Fx and Fy are vector components of F in the x- and y-directions.
Each of the two vector components may be written as a scalar times the
*Perpendicular projections are also called orthogonal projections.

Article 2/3

Rectangular Components

appropriate unit vector. In terms of the unit vectors i and j of Fig. 2/5,
Fx ϭ Fxi and Fy ϭ Fy j, and thus we may write
F ϭ F xi ϩ F y j

(2/2)

where the scalars Fx and Fy are the x and y scalar components of the vector F.
The scalar components can be positive or negative, depending on
the quadrant into which F points. For the force vector of Fig. 2/5, the x
and y scalar components are both positive and are related to the magnitude and direction of F by

y

β

F

x

Fx ϭ F cos ␪

F ϭ ΊFx2 ϩ Fy2

Fy ϭ F sin ␪

␪ ϭ tanϪ1

Fy

Fx = F sin β
Fy = F cos β

(2/3)

Fx

F

Conventions for Describing Vector Components
We express the magnitude of a vector with lightface italic type in
print; that is, ͉F͉ is indicated by F, a quantity which is always nonnegative. However, the scalar components, also denoted by lightface italic
type, will include sign information. See Sample Problems 2/1 and 2/3 for
numerical examples which involve both positive and negative scalar
components.
When both a force and its vector components appear in a diagram, it
is desirable to show the vector components of the force with dashed
lines, as in Fig. 2/5, and show the force with a solid line, or vice versa.
With either of these conventions it will always be clear that a force and
its components are being represented, and not three separate forces, as
would be implied by three solid-line vectors.
Actual problems do not come with reference axes, so their assignment is a matter of arbitrary convenience, and the choice is frequently
up to the student. The logical choice is usually indicated by the way in
which the geometry of the problem is speciﬁed. When the principal dimensions of a body are given in the horizontal and vertical directions, for
example, you would typically assign reference axes in these directions.
Determining the Components of a Force
Dimensions are not always given in horizontal and vertical directions, angles need not be measured counterclockwise from the x-axis,
and the origin of coordinates need not be on the line of action of a force.
Therefore, it is essential that we be able to determine the correct components of a force no matter how the axes are oriented or how the angles are measured. Figure 2/6 suggests a few typical examples of vector
resolution in two dimensions.
Memorization of Eqs. 2/3 is not a substitute for understanding the
parallelogram law and for correctly projecting a vector onto a reference
axis. A neatly drawn sketch always helps to clarify the geometry and
avoid error.

x

β

y

Fx = – F cos β
Fy = – F sin β
y

F

β

x
Fx = F sin (π – β )
Fy = – F cos (π – β )
y
α

β
x
Fx = F cos (β – α )
Fy = F sin(β – α )

Figure 2/6

F

27

28

Chapter 2

Force Systems

Rectangular components are convenient for ﬁnding the sum or resultant R of two forces which are concurrent. Consider two forces F1
and F2 which are originally concurrent at a point O. Figure 2/7 shows
the line of action of F2 shifted from O to the tip of F1 according to the
triangle rule of Fig. 2/3. In adding the force vectors F1 and F2, we may
write
R ϭ F1 ϩ F2 ϭ (F1xi ϩ F1y j) ϩ (F2xi ϩ F2y j)
or
Rxi ϩ Ry j ϭ (F1x ϩ F2x)i ϩ (F1y ϩ F2y) j
from which we conclude that
Rx ϭ F1x ϩ F2x ϭ ΣFx

(2/4)

Ry ϭ F1y ϩ F2y ϭ ΣFy
© Vince Streano/Photographer’s Choice/Getty Images

The term ΣFx means “the algebraic sum of the x scalar components”.
For the example shown in Fig. 2/7, note that the scalar component F2y
would be negative.

y

j

F1 y

F2

F1

F2 y

R

Ry
O

i
F1 x

The structural elements in the foreground transmit concentrated forces
to the brackets at both ends.

F2 x
Rx

Figure 2/7

x

Article 2/3

Rectangular Components

SAMPLE PROBLEM 2/1

29

y

The forces F1, F2, and F3, all of which act on point A of the bracket, are
speciﬁed in three different ways. Determine the x and y scalar components of
each of the three forces.

F1 = 600 N

F2 = 500 N
A

3

35°

4

0.1 m

Solution.

x

The scalar components of F1, from Fig. a, are
0.2 m

F1x ϭ 600 cos 35Њ ϭ 491 N

Ans.

F1y ϭ 600 sin 35Њ ϭ 344 N

Ans.

0.3 m
F3 = 800 N
B

The scalar components of F2, from Fig. b, are

0.4 m

4

F2x ϭ Ϫ500(5) ϭ Ϫ400 N

Ans.

F2y ϭ 500(3) ϭ 300 N
5

Ans.

F3 x

A
35°
A

F3

F1 x

00

α

(a)

=8

Note that the angle which orients F2 to the x-axis is never calculated. The cosine
and sine of the angle are available by inspection of the 3-4-5 triangle. Also note
that the x scalar component of F2 is negative by inspection.
The scalar components of F3 can be obtained by ﬁrst computing the angle ␣
of Fig. c.

F1 = 600 N

F1 y

N

␣ ϭ tanϪ1

ᕡ Then,

΄0.2΅ ϭ 26.6Њ
0.4

F2 = 500 N

F3x ϭ F3 sin ␣ ϭ 800 sin 26.6Њ ϭ 358 N

Ans.

F3y ϭ ϪF3 cos ␣ ϭ Ϫ800 cos 26.6Њ ϭ Ϫ716 N

Ans.

l
0.2i Ϫ 0.4j
AB
F3 ϭ F3nAB ϭ F3 ϭ
ϭ 800
AB
Ί(0.2)2 ϩ (Ϫ0.4)2

΄

΅

0.2 m

4
F2 x

A

B

(c)

Helpful Hints

ᕡ You should carefully examine the
geometry of each component determination problem and not rely on
the blind use of such formulas as
Fx ϭ F cos ␪ and Fy ϭ F sin ␪.

ϭ 800 [0.447i Ϫ 0.894j]
ϭ 358i Ϫ 716j N

ᕢ A unit vector can be formed by di-

The required scalar components are then
F3x ϭ 358 N

Ans.

F3y ϭ Ϫ716 N

Ans.

which agree with our previous results.

3

F3 y

(b)

Alternatively, the scalar components of F3 can be obtained by writing F3 as
a magnitude times a unit vector nAB in the direction of the line segment AB.
Thus,

ᕢ

F2 y

0.4 m

viding any vector, such as the geol
metric position vector AB , by its
length or magnitude. Here we use
the overarrow to denote the vector
which runs from A to B and the
overbar to determine the distance
between A and B.

30

Chapter 2

Force Systems

SAMPLE PROBLEM 2/2

B

P = 800 lb

Combine the two forces P and T, which act on the ﬁxed structure at B, into
a single equivalent force R.

0

T

=

60

lb
y

6′

Graphical solution. The parallelogram for the vector addition of forces T and

ᕡ P is constructed as shown in Fig. a. The scale used here is 1 in. ϭ 800 lb; a scale

A

of 1 in. ϭ 200 lb would be more suitable for regular-size paper and would give
greater accuracy. Note that the angle a must be determined prior to construction
of the parallelogram. From the given ﬁgure
tan ␣ ϭ

6 sin 60Њ
BD
ϭ 0.866
ϭ
3 ϩ 6 cos 60Њ
AD

Geometric solution.

␪ ϭ 49Њ

ϭ

(600)2

ϩ

(800)2

800 lb

00

T

6
α

R
(a)

Helpful Hints

ᕡ Note the repositioning of P to permit parallelogram addition at B.

Ϫ 2(600)(800) cos 40.9Њ ϭ 274,300

R ϭ 524 lb

P

θ

lb

Ans.

The triangle for the vector addition of T and P is

D

3′

B

ᕢ shown in Fig. b. The angle ␣ is calculated as above. The law of cosines gives
R2

C 60°

␣ ϭ 40.9Њ

Measurement of the length R and direction ␪ of the resultant force R yields the
approximate results
R ϭ 525 lb

α

x

Ans.

From the law of sines, we may determine the angle ␪ which orients R. Thus,
524
600
ϭ
sin ␪ sin 40.9Њ

sin ␪ ϭ 0.750

␪ ϭ 48.6Њ

B

Ans.

800 lb
θ

α

P

600 lb

R
α

T
(b)

Algebraic solution.

By using the x-y coordinate system on the given ﬁgure,

we may write

ᕢ Note the repositioning of F so as to
preserve the correct line of action of
the resultant R.

Rx ϭ ΣFx ϭ 800 Ϫ 600 cos 40.9Њ ϭ 346 lb
Ry ϭ ΣFy ϭ Ϫ600 sin 40.9Њ ϭ Ϫ393 lb
The magnitude and direction of the resultant force R as shown in Fig. c are then

y

R ϭ ΊRx2 ϩ Ry2 ϭ Ί(346)2 ϩ (Ϫ393)2 ϭ 524 lb
␪ ϭ tanϪ1

͉Ry ͉
͉Rx ͉

ϭ tanϪ1

393
ϭ 48.6Њ
346

Ans.
Ans.

B

Rx = 346 lb
θ

Ry = – 393 lb

The resultant R may also be written in vector notation as
R ϭ Rxi ϩ Ry j ϭ 346i Ϫ 393j lb

R

Ans.

(c)

x

Article 2/3

Rectangular Components

SAMPLE PROBLEM 2/3

y

The 500-N force F is applied to the vertical pole as shown. (1) Write F in
terms of the unit vectors i and j and identify both its vector and scalar components. (2) Determine the scalar components of the force vector F along the
xЈ- and yЈ-axes. (3) Determine the scalar components of F along the x- and yЈ-axes.

j
y′
30°
x

j′
A
i

Solution.

Part (1).

From Fig. a we may write F as

F = 500 N

30°

F ϭ (F cos ␪)i Ϫ (F sin ␪)j

i′

ϭ (500 cos 60Њ)i Ϫ (500 sin 60Њ)j
ϭ (250i Ϫ 433j) N

x′

Ans.

y

The scalar components are Fx ϭ 250 N and Fy ϭ Ϫ433 N. The vector components are Fx ϭ 250i N and Fy ϭ Ϫ433j N.

FxЈ ϭ 500 N

FyЈ ϭ 0

A

sin 90Њ
͉FyЈ͉
sin 60Њ

ϭ

500
sin 30Њ
500
sin 30Њ

F

Ans.

͉Fx͉ ϭ 1000 N

i′
(a)

(b)
y′

x′

Fx

60°

90°

Fy′

x

30°

90°

60°

F = 500 N

͉FyЈ͉ ϭ 866 N

(c)

The required scalar components are then
Fx ϭ 1000 N

j′

A

F

30°

ϭ

x

θ = 60°

Fy

Part (3). The components of F in the x- and yЈ-directions are nonrectangular and are obtained by completing the parallelogram as shown in Fig. c. The
magnitudes of the components may be calculated by the law of sines. Thus,

ᕡ

y′
Fx

Part (2). From Fig. b we may write F as F ϭ 500iЈ N, so that the required
scalar components are

͉Fx͉

31

Helpful Hint
FyЈ ϭ Ϫ866 N

Ans.

ᕡ Obtain Fx and FyЈ graphically and
compare your results with the calculated values.

SAMPLE PROBLEM 2/4

a

Forces F1 and F2 act on the bracket as shown. Determine the projection Fb
of their resultant R onto the b-axis.

F1 = 100 N
C

Solution. The parallelogram addition of F1 and F2 is shown in the ﬁgure.
Using the law of cosines gives us
R2 ϭ (80)2 ϩ (100)2 Ϫ 2(80)(100) cos 130Њ

a

F1

Ans.

Note that the components of a vector are in general not equal to the projections of the vector onto the same axes. If the a-axis had been perpendicular to
the b-axis, then the projections and components of R would have been equal.

b

F2 = 80 N

R ϭ 163.4 N

The ﬁgure also shows the orthogonal projection Fb of R onto the b-axis. Its
length is
Fb ϭ 80 ϩ 100 cos 50Њ ϭ 144.3 N

30°
20°

0N

10

C

R

50°

80 N
F2

50°

Fb
b

32

Chapter 2

Force Systems
2/4 The line of action of the 3000-lb force runs through
the points A and B as shown in the ﬁgure. Determine
the x and y scalar components of F.

PROBLEMS
Introductory Problems
2/1 The force F has a magnitude of 600 N. Express F as a
vector in terms of the unit vectors i and j. Identify
the x and y scalar components of F.

y, ft
B (8, 6)

y

F = 3000 lb
x, ft

O
A (–7, –2)
x

40°

O

Problem 2/4
F = 600 N

Problem 2/1

2/5 The 1800-N force F is applied to the end of the
I-beam. Express F as a vector using the unit vectors i
and j.

2/2 The magnitude of the force F is 400 lb. Express F as
a vector in terms of the unit vectors i and j. Identify
both the scalar and vector components of F.

y

y, ft

F = 1800 N

4

A
3
O

F = 400 lb

x
z

x, ft
30°

Problem 2/5

A (3, –1)

2/6 The control rod AP exerts a force F on the sector as
shown. Determine both the x-y and the n-t components of the force.

Problem 2/2

2/3 The slope of the 6.5-kN force F is speciﬁed as shown
in the ﬁgure. Express F as a vector in terms of the
unit vectors i and j.

F
y

β

A

y
n

F = 6.5 kN

P

5

α

12

x
O

Problem 2/3

r

Problem 2/6

t
x

Article 2/3
2/7 The two structural members, one of which is in tension and the other in compression, exert the indicated forces on joint O. Determine the magnitude of
the resultant R of the two forces and the angle ␪
which R makes with the positive x-axis.

Problems

33

Representative Problems
2/10 Determine the n- and t-components of the force F
which is exerted by the rod AB on the crank OA.
Evaluate your general expression for F ϭ 100 N and
(a) ␪ ϭ 30Њ, ␤ ϭ 10Њ and (b) ␪ ϭ 15Њ, ␤ ϭ 25Њ.

3 kN

F
B

2 kN

β

t
n

y

4
3

30°

A

x
O
θ

Problem 2/7

x

O

2/8 The t-component of the force F is known to be 75 N.
Determine the n-component and the magnitude of F.
n

Problem 2/10

t

F

2/11 The two forces shown act at point A of the bent bar.
Determine the resultant R of the two forces.

10°
30°

F1 = 3 kips

30°
A

Problem 2/8

2/9 Two forces are applied to the construction bracket as
shown. Determine the angle ␪ which makes the resultant of the two forces vertical. Determine the magnitude R of the resultant.

F2 = 7 kips

45°

y

F1 = 800 lb y
F2 = 425 lb

x

70°
θ

Problem 2/11
x

z

Problem 2/9

34

Chapter 2

Force Systems

2/12 A small probe P is gently forced against the circular
surface with a vertical force F as shown. Determine
the n- and t-components of this force as functions of
the horizontal position s.

T

60°
y

F

P

x

n

T
t
s
Problem 2/14
r

2/15 To satisfy design limitations it is necessary to determine the effect of the 2-kN tension in the cable on
the shear, tension, and bending of the ﬁxed I-beam.
For this purpose replace this force by its equivalent
of two forces at A, Ft parallel and Fn perpendicular
to the beam. Determine Ft and Fn.

O
Problem 2/12

A
20°

2/13 The guy cables AB and AC are attached to the top of
the transmission tower. The tension in cable AB is
8 kN. Determine the required tension T in cable AC
such that the net effect of the two cable tensions is a
downward force at point A. Determine the magnitude R of this downward force.

2 kN
30°

Problem 2/15
A
30 m
C

2/16 Determine the x- and y-components of the tension T
which is applied to point A of the bar OA. Neglect
the effects of the small pulley at B. Assume that r
and ␪ are known.

20 m
B

O

θ

40 m

50 m
r
Problem 2/13

2/14 If the equal tensions T in the pulley cable are 400 N,
express in vector notation the force R exerted on
the pulley by the two tensions. Determine the magnitude of R.

n

A
B

t

y

x
T
r
Problem 2/16

Article 2/3
2/17 Refer to the mechanism of the previous problem.
Develop general expressions for the n- and t-components of the tension T applied to point A. Then evaluate your expressions for T ϭ 100 N and ␪ ϭ 35Њ.

Problems

35

a

2/18 The ratio of the lift force L to the drag force D for
the simple airfoil is L/D ϭ 10. If the lift force on a
short section of the airfoil is 50 lb, compute the
magnitude of the resultant force R and the angle ␪
which it makes with the horizontal.

30°

O

R = 800 N

110°

L
b
Problem 2/20
C

2/21 Determine the components of the 800-lb force F
along the oblique axes a and b. Also, determine the
projections of F onto the a- and b-axes.

D

Air flow

F = 800 lb

Problem 2/18

b

2/19 Determine the resultant R of the two forces applied
to the bracket. Write R in terms of unit vectors
along the x- and y-axes shown.

60°
a

150 N

45°

y
'

y

x
'

Problem 2/21

30°
200 N
35°
x

2/22 Determine the components Fa and Fb of the 4-kN
force along the oblique axes a and b. Determine the
projections Pa and Pb of F onto the a- and b-axes.
y

20°
b
F = 4 kN

Problem 2/19

2/20 Determine the scalar components Ra and Rb of the
force R along the nonrectangular axes a and b. Also
determine the orthogonal projection Pa of R onto
axis a.

30°
40°
15°
O
Problem 2/22

a

x

36

Chapter 2

Force Systems

2/23 Determine the resultant R of the two forces shown
by (a) applying the parallelogram rule for vector
addition and (b) summing scalar components.

2/26 The cable AB prevents bar OA from rotating clockwise about the pivot O. If the cable tension is 750 N,
determine the n- and t-components of this force acting on point A of the bar.
t

y

n
A

1.5
m

x
60°
600 N
B
400 N

O

60°

1.2 m

Problem 2/23

Problem 2/26

2/24 It is desired to remove the spike from the timber by
applying force along its horizontal axis. An obstruction A prevents direct access, so that two forces, one
400 lb and the other P, are applied by cables as
shown. Compute the magnitude of P necessary to
ensure a resultant T directed along the spike. Also
ﬁnd T.

2/27 At what angle ␪ must the 400-lb force be applied in
order that the resultant R of the two forces have a
magnitude of 1000 lb? For this condition what will
be the angle ␤ between R and the horizontal?

400 lb

P

8″

4″
A

6″
700 lb

θ

O
400 lb
Problem 2/24

2/25 At what angle ␪ must the 800-lb force be applied in
order that the resultant R of the two forces have a
magnitude of 2000 lb? For this condition, determine
the angle ␤ between R and the vertical.
1400 lb

800 lb
θ

Problem 2/25

Problem 2/27

Article 2/3
2/28 In the design of the robot to insert the small cylindrical part into a close-ﬁtting circular hole, the
robot arm must exert a 90-N force P on the part
parallel to the axis of the hole as shown. Determine
the components of the force which the part exerts
on the robot along axes (a) parallel and perpendicular to the arm AB, and (b) parallel and perpendicular to the arm BC.

60°

k

x

D

A

A

y

45°

n

P = 90 N
C

37

᭤2/29 The unstretched length of the spring is r. When pin
P is in an arbitrary position ␪, determine the x- and
y-components of the force which the spring exerts
on the pin. Evaluate your general expressions for
r ϭ 400 mm, k ϭ 1.4 kN/m, and ␪ ϭ 40Њ. (Note: The
force in a spring is given by F ϭ k␦, where ␦ is the
extension from the unstretched length.)

15°

B

Problems

2r
P
r
θ

t

O

Problem 2/28

Problem 2/29

᭤2/30 Refer to the ﬁgure and statement of Prob. 2/29.
When pin P is in the position ␪ ϭ 20Њ, determine the
n- and t-components of the force F which the spring
of modulus k ϭ 1.4 kN/m exerts on the pin. The distance r ϭ 400 mm.

38

Chapter 2

Force Systems

2/4

In addition to the tendency to move a body in the direction of its application, a force can also tend to rotate a body about an axis. The axis
may be any line which neither intersects nor is parallel to the line of action of the force. This rotational tendency is known as the moment M of
the force. Moment is also referred to as torque.
As a familiar example of the concept of moment, consider the pipe
wrench of Fig. 2/8a. One effect of the force applied perpendicular to
the handle of the wrench is the tendency to rotate the pipe about its
vertical axis. The magnitude of this tendency depends on both the
magnitude F of the force and the effective length d of the wrench
handle. Common experience shows that a pull which is not perpendicular to the wrench handle is less effective than the right-angle pull
shown.

d
F

Moment about a Point
Figure 2/8b shows a two-dimensional body acted on by a force F in
its plane. The magnitude of the moment or tendency of the force to rotate the body about the axis O-O perpendicular to the plane of the
body is proportional both to the magnitude of the force and to the moment arm d, which is the perpendicular distance from the axis to the
line of action of the force. Therefore, the magnitude of the moment is
defined as

(a)
O

M
F

α

r

A

M ϭ Fd

d

(b)

O
M

(c)
y
F
+

x
M = Fd
A
d

(d)

Figure 2/8

Moment

(2/5)

The moment is a vector M perpendicular to the plane of the body. The
sense of M depends on the direction in which F tends to rotate the
body. The right-hand rule, Fig. 2/8c, is used to identify this sense. We
represent the moment of F about O-O as a vector pointing in the direction of the thumb, with the ﬁngers curled in the direction of the rotational tendency.
The moment M obeys all the rules of vector combination and may
be considered a sliding vector with a line of action coinciding with the
moment axis. The basic units of moment in SI units are newton-meters
(N ⅐ m), and in the U.S. customary system are pound-feet (lb-ft).
When dealing with forces which all act in a given plane, we customarily speak of the moment about a point. By this we mean the moment
with respect to an axis normal to the plane and passing through the
point. Thus, the moment of force F about point A in Fig. 2/8d has the
magnitude M ϭ Fd and is counterclockwise.
Moment directions may be accounted for by using a stated sign convention, such as a plus sign (ϩ) for counterclockwise moments and a
minus sign (Ϫ) for clockwise moments, or vice versa. Sign consistency
within a given problem is essential. For the sign convention of Fig. 2/8d,
the moment of F about point A (or about the z-axis passing through
point A) is positive. The curved arrow of the ﬁgure is a convenient way
to represent moments in two-dimensional analysis.

Article 2/4

The Cross Product
In some two-dimensional and many of the three-dimensional problems to follow, it is convenient to use a vector approach for moment calculations. The moment of F about point A of Fig. 2/8b may be
represented by the cross-product expression
Mϭr؋F

(2/6)

where r is a position vector which runs from the moment reference
point A to any point on the line of action of F. The magnitude of this expression is given by*
M ϭ Fr sin ␣ ϭ Fd

(2/7)

which agrees with the moment magnitude as given by Eq. 2/5. Note that
the moment arm d ϭ r sin ␣ does not depend on the particular point on
the line of action of F to which the vector r is directed. We establish the
direction and sense of M by applying the right-hand rule to the sequence r ؋ F. If the ﬁngers of the right hand are curled in the direction
of rotation from the positive sense of r to the positive sense of F, then
the thumb points in the positive sense of M.
We must maintain the sequence r ؋ F, because the sequence F ؋ r
would produce a vector with a sense opposite to that of the correct
moment. As was the case with the scalar approach, the moment M
may be thought of as the moment about point A or as the moment
about the line O-O which passes through point A and is perpendicular
to the plane containing the vectors r and F. When we evaluate the
moment of a force about a given point, the choice between using the
vector cross product or the scalar expression depends on how the
geometry of the problem is specified. If we know or can easily determine the perpendicular distance between the line of action of the
force and the moment center, then the scalar approach is generally
simpler. If, however, F and r are not perpendicular and are easily expressible in vector notation, then the cross-product expression is
often preferable.
In Section B of this chapter, we will see how the vector formulation
of the moment of a force is especially useful for determining the moment of a force about a point in three-dimensional situations.

Varignon’s Theorem
One of the most useful principles of mechanics is Varignon’s theorem, which states that the moment of a force about any point is equal to
the sum of the moments of the components of the force about the same
point.
*See item 7 in Art. C/7 of Appendix C for additional information concerning the cross
product.

Moment

39

40

Chapter 2

Force Systems

To prove this theorem, consider the force R acting in the plane of
the body shown in Fig. 2/9a. The forces P and Q represent any two nonrectangular components of R. The moment of R about point O is
MO ϭ r ؋ R
Because R ϭ P ϩ Q, we may write
r ؋ R ϭ r ؋ (P ϩ Q)
Using the distributive law for cross products, we have
MO ϭ r ؋ R ϭ r ؋ P ϩ r ؋ Q

(2/8)

which says that the moment of R about O equals the sum of the moments about O of its components P and Q. This proves the theorem.
Varignon’s theorem need not be restricted to the case of two components, but it applies equally well to three or more. Thus we could have
used any number of concurrent components of R in the foregoing
proof.*
Figure 2/9b illustrates the usefulness of Varignon’s theorem. The
moment of R about point O is Rd. However, if d is more difﬁcult to determine than p and q, we can resolve R into the components P and Q,
and compute the moment as
MO ϭ Rd ϭ ϪpP ϩ qQ
where we take the clockwise moment sense to be positive.
Sample Problem 2/5 shows how Varignon’s theorem can help us to
calculate moments.

R

R
P

P

B

B

q

Q
r

Q

d
O p

O

(b)

(a)

Figure 2/9

*As originally stated, Varignon’s theorem was limited to the case of two concurrent components of a given force. See The Science of Mechanics, by Ernst Mach, originally published in 1883.

Article 2/4

SAMPLE PROBLEM 2/5

Moment

2m

Calculate the magnitude of the moment about the base point O of the 600-N
force in ﬁve different ways.

A
40°
600 N

4m

Solution.

(I)

41

The moment arm to the 600-N force is
d ϭ 4 cos 40Њ ϩ 2 sin 40Њ ϭ 4.35 m

O

ᕡ By M ϭ Fd the moment is clockwise and has the magnitude

2m
40°

MO ϭ 600(4.35) ϭ 2610 N ⅐ m

Ans.
4m

(II)

600 N

Replace the force by its rectangular components at A,
F1 ϭ 600 cos 40Њ ϭ 460 N,

40° d

F2 ϭ 600 sin 40Њ ϭ 386 N

O

By Varignon’s theorem, the moment becomes

ᕢ

MO ϭ 460(4) ϩ 386(2) ϭ 2610 N ⅐ m

Ans.

(III) By the principle of transmissibility, move the 600-N force along its
line of action to point B, which eliminates the moment of the component F2. The
moment arm of F1 becomes

4m

F2 = 600 sin 40°

O

d1 ϭ 4 ϩ 2 tan 40Њ ϭ 5.68 m

B

and the moment is

y

F1

F2

MO ϭ 460(5.68) ϭ 2610 N ⅐ m

ᕣ

F1 = 600 cos 40°

2m

A

x

Ans.

(IV) Moving the force to point C eliminates the moment of the component
F1. The moment arm of F2 becomes

d1

F

r

C

d2 ϭ 2 ϩ 4 cot 40Њ ϭ 6.77 m

O

d2

and the moment is

F2

MO ϭ 386(6.77) ϭ 2610 N ⅐ m

Ans.
Helpful Hints

(V) By the vector expression for a moment, and by using the coordinate
system indicated on the ﬁgure together with the procedures for evaluating cross
products, we have

ᕤ

similar problems should not cause difﬁculty if the sketch is carefully drawn.

ᕢ This procedure is frequently the

MO ϭ r ؋ F ϭ (2i ϩ 4j) ؋ 600(i cos 40Њ Ϫ j sin 40Њ)

shortest approach.

ᕣ The fact that points B and C are not

ϭ Ϫ2610k N ⅐ m
The minus sign indicates that the vector is in the negative z-direction. The magnitude of the vector expression is
MO ϭ 2610 N ⅐ m

ᕡ The required geometry here and in

Ans.

on the body proper should not cause
concern, as the mathematical calculation of the moment of a force does not
require that the force be on the body.

ᕤ Alternative choices for the position

vector r are r ϭ d1 j ϭ 5.68j m and
r ϭ d2i ϭ 6.77i m.

F1

42

Chapter 2

Force Systems

SAMPLE PROBLEM 2/6
The trap door OA is raised by the cable AB, which passes over the small frictionless guide pulleys at B. The tension everywhere in the cable is T, and this tension applied at A causes a moment MO about the hinge at O. Plot the quantity MO/T
as a function of the door elevation angle ␪ over the range 0 Յ ␪ Յ 90Њ and note minimum and maximum values. What is the physical signiﬁcance of this ratio?

B

T

0.3 m
A

0.4 m
0.5 m
O

We begin by constructing a ﬁgure which shows the tension force T
acting directly on the door, which is shown in an arbitrary angular position ␪. It
should be clear that the direction of T will vary as ␪ varies. In order to deal with
this variation, we write a unit vector nAB which “aims” T:

θ

Solution.

y
B

ᕡ

rOB

Using the x-y coordinates of our ﬁgure, we can write

ᕢ

d

O

rOB ϭ 0.4j m and rOA ϭ 0.5(cos ␪i ϩ sin ␪j) m
So

A
rOA
θ

x

Helpful Hints

rAB ϭ rOB Ϫ rOA ϭ 0.4j Ϫ (0.5)(cos ␪i ϩ sin ␪j)

ᕡ Recall that any unit vector can be

ϭ Ϫ0.5 cos ␪i ϩ (0.4 Ϫ 0.5 sin ␪)j m

written as a vector divided by its
magnitude. In this case the vector in
the numerator is a position vector.

and
rAB ϭ Ί(0.5 cos ␪)2 ϩ (0.4 Ϫ 0.5 sin ␪)2

0.5

ϭ Ί0.41 Ϫ 0.4 sin ␪ m

0.4

The desired unit vector is
rAB Ϫ0.5 cos ␪i ϩ (0.4 Ϫ 0.5 sin ␪)j
nAB ϭ r ϭ
AB
Ί0.41 Ϫ 0.4 sin ␪

MO
——– ,
T

Our tension vector can now be written as

΄

T ϭ TnAB ϭ T

Ί0.41 Ϫ 0.4 sin ␪

΄

MO ϭ 0.4j ؋ T

΅

0.2T cos ␪
Ί0.41 Ϫ 0.4 sin ␪

T

ϭ

θ , deg

ten as a magnitude times an “aiming” unit vector.

k

ᕣ In the expression M ϭ r ؋ F, the position vector r runs from the moment center to any point on the line
of action of F. Here, rOB is more convenient than rOA.

0.2T cos ␪
Ί0.41 Ϫ 0.4 sin ␪

and the requested ratio is
MO

0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90

ᕢ Recall that any vector may be writ-

΅

The magnitude of MO is
MO ϭ

0.2

0

Ϫ0.5 cos ␪i ϩ (0.4 Ϫ 0.5 sin ␪)j
Ί0.41 Ϫ 0.4 sin ␪

0.3
m

0.1

Ϫ0.5 cos ␪i ϩ (0.4 Ϫ 0.5 sin ␪)j

ᕣ The moment of T about point O, as a vector, is MO ϭ rOB ؋ T, where rOB ϭ 0.4j m, or

ϭ

rAB
T

rAB rOB Ϫ rOA
nAB ϭ r ϭ
rAB
AB

0.2 cos ␪
Ί0.41 Ϫ 0.4 sin ␪

Ans.

which is plotted in the accompanying graph. The expression MO/T is the moment
arm d (in meters) which runs from O to the line of action of T. It has a maximum
value of 0.4 m at ␪ ϭ 53.1Њ (at which point T is horizontal) and a minimum value of
0 at ␪ ϭ 90Њ (at which point T is vertical). The expression is valid even if T varies.
This sample problem treats moments in two-dimensional force systems, and
it also points out the advantages of carrying out a solution for an arbitrary position, so that behavior over a range of positions can be examined.

Article 2/4

PROBLEMS

Problems

43

Q
T

Introductory Problems

P

2/31 The 4-kN force F is applied at point A. Compute the
moment of F about point O, expressing it both as
a scalar and as a vector quantity. Determine the
coordinates of the points on the x- and y-axes
about which the moment of F is zero.

R

50 mm

y, m

M

O

A (1.2, 1.5)
3

Problem 2/33

5

F = 4 kN

x, m

O

2/34 The force of magnitude F acts along the edge of the
triangular plate. Determine the moment of F about
point O.
b
O

A

Problem 2/31

2/32 The rectangular plate is made up of 1-ft squares as
shown. A 30-lb force is applied at point A in the direction shown. Calculate the moment MB of the force
about point B by at least two different methods.

h
F

30 lb
1 ft

B

A

Problem 2/34

1 ft

2/35 Calculate the moment of the 250-N force on the
handle of the monkey wrench about the center of
the bolt.

y

250 N
x

B

15°
200 mm

Problem 2/32

2/33 The throttle-control sector pivots freely at O. If an
internal torsional spring exerts a return moment
M ϭ 1.8 N ⅐ m on the sector when in the position
shown, for design purposes determine the necessary
throttle-cable tension T so that the net moment
about O is zero. Note that when T is zero, the sector
rests against the idle-control adjustment screw at R.

30 mm

Problem 2/35

44

Chapter 2

Force Systems

2/36 The tension in cable AB is 100 N. Determine the
moment about O of this tension as applied to point
A of the T-shaped bar. The dimension b is 600 mm.

20°
F = 60 N

b–
–
2

A

O

b–
–
2

r = 100 mm

Problem 2/38
b

60°

O

B

Representative Problems
b

Problem 2/36

2/37 A prybar is used to remove a nail as shown. Determine the moment of the 60-lb force about the point
O of contact between the prybar and the small support block.

2/39 The slender quarter-circular member of mass m is
built-in at its support O. Determine the moment of
its weight about point O. Use Table D/3 as necessary to determine the location of the mass center of
the body.
m

60 lb
b

A

15°
14″

O

Problem 2/39

2/40 The 30-N force P is applied perpendicular to the
portion BC of the bent bar. Determine the moment
of P about point B and about point A.

65°

O

P = 30 N
1.2″
C

1.6 m

Problem 2/37

2/38 A force F of magnitude 60 N is applied to the gear.
Determine the moment of F about point O.

45°
B
1.6 m

A

Problem 2/40

Article 2/4
2/41 Compute the moment of the 0.4-lb force about the
pivot O of the wall-switch toggle.

Problems

45

2/44 Determine the moments of the tension T about
point P and about point O.

F = 0.4 lb

T
10°
A

α
θ

A
O
30°
8

O

r

7
_″

P
Problem 2/44
Problem 2/41

2/42 The cable AB carries a tension of 400 N. Determine
the moment about O of this tension as applied to
point A of the slender bar.
B

2/45 The lower lumbar region A of the spine is the part
of the spinal column most susceptible to abuse while
resisting excessive bending caused by the moment
about A of a force F. For given values of F, b, and h,
determine the angle ␪ which causes the most severe
bending strain.

F

θ

650 mm
A
m
0m
50

h

30°

A

O

b

Problem 2/42
Problem 2/45

2/43 As a trailer is towed in the forward direction, the
force F ϭ 120 lb is applied as shown to the ball of
the trailer hitch. Determine the moment of this
force about point O.
F = 120 lb
30°
1.25′′
A
O

11′′
Problem 2/43

1.5′′

46

Chapter 2

Force Systems

2/46 Determine the combined moment about O due to
the weight of the mailbox and the cross member AB.
The mailbox weighs 4 lb and the uniform cross
member weighs 10 lb. Both weights act at the geometric centers of the respective items.
1″
19″

3″

s
IN

D WE TRU
GO
ST

9.5 mm
LIBERTY

3.5

1989

mm
O

7″

20°

7″
9″
pennies

3.5″
A

B

dimes

Problem 2/47

2/48 The crank of Prob. 2/10 is repeated here. If
OA ϭ 50 mm, ␪ ϭ 25Њ, and ␤ ϭ 55Њ, determine the
moment of the force F of magnitude F ϭ 20 N about
point O.

38″

F

B

β

t
n

y

O
Problem 2/46

A

2/47 A portion of a mechanical coin sorter works as follows: Pennies and dimes roll down the 20Њ incline,
the last triangular portion of which pivots freely
about a horizontal axis through O. Dimes are light
enough (2.28 grams each) so that the triangular
portion remains stationary, and the dimes roll into
the right collection column. Pennies, on the other
hand, are heavy enough (3.06 grams each) so that
the triangular portion pivots clockwise, and the pennies roll into the left collection column. Determine
the moment about O of the weight of the penny in
terms of the slant distance s in millimeters.

θ

x

O

Problem 2/48

Article 2/4
2/49 Elements of the lower arm are shown in the ﬁgure.
The weight of the forearm is 5 lb with mass center
at G. Determine the combined moment about the
elbow pivot O of the weights of the forearm and the
sphere. What must the biceps tension force be so
that the overall moment about O is zero?

Problems

47

2/51 In order to raise the ﬂagpole OC, a light frame OAB
is attached to the pole and a tension of 780 lb is developed in the hoisting cable by the power winch D.
Calculate the moment MO of this tension about the
hinge point O.
A

10′

10′

20°
10′

D

B

C

O

T

Problem 2/51
2″

2/52 Determine the angle ␪ which will maximize the
moment MO of the 50-lb force about the shaft axis
at O. Also compute MO.

O
55°

G

6″
A

θ

10″
5 lb
30°

8 lb
13″
Problem 2/49

7″

2/50 The mechanism of Prob. 2/16 is repeated here. For
the conditions ␪ ϭ 40Њ, T ϭ 150 N, and r ϭ 200 mm,
determine the moment about O of the tension T
applied by cable AB to point A.

O

Problem 2/52
O

θ

r
n

A
B

t

y

x
T
r
Problem 2/50

50 lb

48

Chapter 2

Force Systems

2/53 The spring-loaded follower A bears against the circular portion of the cam until the lobe of the cam lifts
the plunger. The force required to lift the plunger is
proportional to its vertical movement h from its lowest position. For design purposes determine the
angle ␪ for which the moment of the contact force on
the cam about the bearing O is a maximum. In the
enlarged view of the contact, neglect the small distance between the actual contact point B and the
end C of the lobe.

24″

30″

y
40″

O
B

A

x

z
Problem 2/54

C
40 mm

θ
O

80 mm

Problem 2/53

2/54 As the result of a wind blowing normal to the plane
of the rectangular sign, a uniform pressure of 3.5
lb/ft2 is exerted in the direction shown in the ﬁgure.
Determine the moment of the resulting force about
point O. Express your result as a vector using the
coordinates shown.

2/55 An exerciser begins with his arm in the relaxed vertical position OA, at which the elastic band is unstretched. He then rotates his arm to the horizontal
position OB. The elastic modulus of the band is
k ϭ 60 N/m—that is, 60 N of force is required to
stretch the band each additional meter of elongation. Determine the moment about O of the force
which the band exerts on the hand B.

635 mm
B

O

F

A

740 mm

C

Problem 2/55

Article 2/4
2/56 The rocker arm BD of an automobile engine is supported by a nonrotating shaft at C. If the design
value of the force exerted by the pushrod AB on the
rocker arm is 80 lb, determine the force which the
valve stem DE must exert at D in order for the combined moment about point C to be zero. Compute
the resultant of these two forces exerted on the
rocker arm. Note that the points B, C, and D lie on a
horizontal line and that both the pushrod and valve
stem exert forces along their axes.
1.75″

A

Problems

49

7
m 85
m
3
m 40
m

110
mm
C

θ
O

1″

360
mm

B

Problem 2/57
B

C

D

2/58 The 120-N force is applied as shown to one end of
the curved wrench. If ␣ ϭ 30Њ, calculate the moment
of F about the center O of the bolt. Determine the
value of ␣ which would maximize the moment about
O; state the value of this maximum moment.
F = 120 N

A

E
α

10°

5°

A
Problem 2/56

25 mm
O
Problem 2/58

70 m
m

150 mm

70 m
m

2/57 The small crane is mounted along the side of a
pickup bed and facilitates the handling of heavy
loads. When the boom elevation angle is ␪ ϭ 40Њ, the
force in the hydraulic cylinder BC is 4.5 kN, and
this force applied at point C is in the direction from
B to C (the cylinder is in compression). Determine
the moment of this 4.5-kN force about the boom
pivot point O.

25 mm

50

Chapter 2

Force Systems

2/5
O

–F

The moment produced by two equal, opposite, and noncollinear
forces is called a couple. Couples have certain unique properties and
have important applications in mechanics.
Consider the action of two equal and opposite forces F and ϪF a distance d apart, as shown in Fig. 2/10a. These two forces cannot be combined
into a single force because their sum in every direction is zero. Their only
effect is to produce a tendency of rotation. The combined moment of the
two forces about an axis normal to their plane and passing through any
point such as O in their plane is the couple M. This couple has a magnitude

a
F
d

(a)

O

rB
rA

B

Couple

–F
r
F
A

M ϭ F(a ϩ d) Ϫ Fa
or
M ϭ Fd

(b)

Its direction is counterclockwise when viewed from above for the case illustrated. Note especially that the magnitude of the couple is independent of the distance a which locates the forces with respect to the
moment center O. It follows that the moment of a couple has the same
value for all moment centers.

M
O

Vector Algebra Method
We may also express the moment of a couple by using vector algebra. With the cross-product notation of Eq. 2/6, the combined moment
about point O of the forces forming the couple of Fig. 2/10b is

(c)

M ϭ rA ؋ F ϩ rB ؋ (ϪF) ϭ (rA Ϫ rB) ؋ F
M

where rA and rB are position vectors which run from point O to arbitrary points A and B on the lines of action of F and ϪF, respectively. Because rA Ϫ rB ϭ r, we can express M as

M

Mϭr؋F
M

M

Counterclockwise
couple

Clockwise
couple
(d)

Figure 2/10

Here again, the moment expression contains no reference to the moment center O and, therefore, is the same for all moment centers. Thus,
we may represent M by a free vector, as shown in Fig. 2/10c, where the
direction of M is normal to the plane of the couple and the sense of M is
established by the right-hand rule.
Because the couple vector M is always perpendicular to the plane of
the forces which constitute the couple, in two-dimensional analysis we
can represent the sense of a couple vector as clockwise or counterclockwise by one of the conventions shown in Fig. 2/10d. Later, when we deal
with couple vectors in three-dimensional problems, we will make full
use of vector notation to represent them, and the mathematics will automatically account for their sense.

Equivalent Couples
Changing the values of F and d does not change a given couple as
long as the product Fd remains the same. Likewise, a couple is not affected if the forces act in a different but parallel plane. Figure 2/11

Article 2/5

M

M

M

M
– 2F

–F
d

d /2

F

≡

≡

–F

≡

F

d

d

–F

F

Figure 2/11

shows four different conﬁgurations of the same couple M. In each of
the four cases, the couples are equivalent and are described by the
same free vector which represents the identical tendencies to rotate the
bodies.

Force–Couple Systems
The effect of a force acting on a body is the tendency to push or pull
the body in the direction of the force, and to rotate the body about any
ﬁxed axis which does not intersect the line of the force. We can represent this dual effect more easily by replacing the given force by an equal
parallel force and a couple to compensate for the change in the moment
of the force.
The replacement of a force by a force and a couple is illustrated in
Fig. 2/12, where the given force F acting at point A is replaced by an
equal force F at some point B and the counterclockwise couple M ϭ Fd.
The transfer is seen in the middle ﬁgure, where the equal and opposite
forces F and ϪF are added at point B without introducing any net external effects on the body. We now see that the original force at A and the
equal and opposite one at B constitute the couple M ϭ Fd, which is
counterclockwise for the sample chosen, as shown in the right-hand part
of the ﬁgure. Thus, we have replaced the original force at A by the same
force acting at a different point B and a couple, without altering the external effects of the original force on the body. The combination of the
force and couple in the right-hand part of Fig. 2/12 is referred to as a
force–couple system.
By reversing this process, we can combine a given couple and a force
which lies in the plane of the couple (normal to the couple vector) to
produce a single, equivalent force. Replacement of a force by an equivalent force–couple system, and the reverse procedure, have many applications in mechanics and should be mastered.

B
F
A

≡

–F

d

F

B
F

A

Figure 2/12

≡

B

M = Fd

F

2F

Couple

51

52

Chapter 2

Force Systems

SAMPLE PROBLEM 2/7
M

The rigid structural member is subjected to a couple consisting of the two
100-N forces. Replace this couple by an equivalent couple consisting of the two
forces P and ϪP, each of which has a magnitude of 400 N. Determine the proper
angle ␪.

40
–P

100

The original couple is counterclockwise when the plane of the forces
is viewed from above, and its magnitude is

Solution.

[M ϭ Fd]

P

θ

θ

100

M ϭ 100(0.1) ϭ 10 N ⅐ m

The forces P and ϪP produce a counterclockwise couple
M ϭ 400(0.040) cos ␪

60

100
100 N

ᕡ Equating the two expressions gives

100 N

10 ϭ (400)(0.040) cos ␪
␪ ϭ cosϪ1 10 ϭ 51.3Њ
16

Dimensions in millimeters

Ans.

P = 400 N

θ

Helpful Hint

ᕡ Since the two equal couples are parallel free vectors, the only dimensions

40 mm

dθ

which are relevant are those which give the perpendicular distances between
the forces of the couples.

θ
P = 400 N

SAMPLE PROBLEM 2/8

80 lb

Replace the horizontal 80-lb force acting on the lever by an equivalent system consisting of a force at O and a couple.
9″

[M ϭ Fd]

M ϭ 80(9 sin 60Њ) ϭ 624 lb-in.

60°

O

We apply two equal and opposite 80-lb forces at O and identify the
counterclockwise couple

Solution.

Ans.

80 lb

80 lb

ᕡ Thus, the original force is equivalent to the 80-lb force at O and the 624-lb-in.
couple as shown in the third of the three equivalent ﬁgures.

≡

Helpful Hint

ᕡ The reverse of this problem is often encountered, namely, the replacement
of a force and a couple by a single force. Proceeding in reverse is the same as
replacing the couple by two forces, one of which is equal and opposite to the
80-lb force at O. The moment arm to the second force would be M/F ϭ
624/80 ϭ 7.79 in., which is 9 sin 60Њ, thus determining the line of action of
the single resultant force of 80 lb.

O

≡
O

80 lb 80 lb

O
80 lb
624 lb-in.

Article 2/5

PROBLEMS
Introductory Problems
2/59 Compute the combined moment of the two 90-lb
forces about (a) point O and (b) point A.

Problems

53

2/61 Replace the force–couple system at point O by a
single force. Specify the coordinate yA of the point
on the y-axis through which the line of action of this
resultant force passes.
y

y

90 lb

A
8″

80 N·m

x

O
4″

x

O

200 N

Problem 2/61

4″

2/62 The top view of a revolving entrance door is shown.
Two persons simultaneously approach the door and
exert force of equal magnitudes as shown. If the
resulting moment about the door pivot axis at O is
25 N ⅐ m, determine the force magnitude F.

90 lb
Problem 2/59

2/60 Replace the 12-kN force acting at point A by a
force–couple system at (a) point O and (b) point B.

15°

F

y

0.8 m

12 kN
O
30°
A

4m
O

5m

0.8 m

x

–F
15°
Problem 2/62

B

Problem 2/60

54

Chapter 2

Force Systems

2/63 Determine the moment associated with the couple
applied to the rectangular plate. Reconcile the
results with those for the individual special cases of
␪ ϭ 0, b ϭ 0, and h ϭ 0.

2/65 The 7-lb force is applied by the control rod on the
sector as shown. Determine the equivalent force–
couple system at O.
T = 7 lb

F

θ

30°

A
h
O

b

θ

15°
15°

"
3

F

Problem 2/63

Problem 2/65

2/64 As part of a test, the two aircraft engines are revved
up and the propeller pitches are adjusted so as to result in the fore and aft thrusts shown. What force F
must be exerted by the ground on each of the main
braked wheels at A and B to counteract the turning
effect of the two propeller thrusts? Neglect any effects of the nose wheel C, which is turned 90Њ and
unbraked.

2/66 Replace the 10-kN force acting on the steel column
by an equivalent force–couple system at point O.
This replacement is frequently done in the design of
structures.
10 kN
75 mm

1m
500 lb
O

A
8′ 14′

Problem 2/66

C
500 lb

B

Problem 2/64

Article 2/5
2/67 Each propeller of the twin-screw ship develops a
full-speed thrust of 300 kN. In maneuvering the
ship, one propeller is turning full speed ahead and
the other full speed in reverse. What thrust P must
each tug exert on the ship to counteract the effect of
the ship’s propellers?

Problems

55

2/69 A lug wrench is used to tighten a square-head bolt.
If 50-lb forces are applied to the wrench as shown,
determine the magnitude F of the equal forces
exerted on the four contact points on the 1-in. bolt
head so that their external effect on the bolt is
equivalent to that of the two 50-lb forces. Assume
that the forces are perpendicular to the ﬂats of the
bolt head.

50 m

1″

F
12 m
50 lb

F
A
120 m

C

View C Detail
(clearances exaggerated)

14″
50 lb
Problem 2/67

B

14″

Representative Problems

Problem 2/69

2/68 The force–couple system at A is to be replaced by
a single equivalent force acting at a point B on
the vertical edge (or its extension) of the triangular
plate. Determine the distance d between A and B.

2/70 A force–couple system acts at O on the 60Њ circular
sector. Determine the magnitude of the force F if
the given system can be replaced by a stand-alone
force at corner A of the sector.

MA
A

R

d

F

h

F

B
60°

b
Problem 2/68

80 N·m O

0.4 m
Problem 2/70

A

56

Chapter 2

Force Systems

2/71 During a steady right turn, a person exerts the forces
shown on the steering wheel. Note that each force
consists of a tangential component and a radiallyinward component. Determine the moment exerted
about the steering column at O.

2/73 The tie-rod AB exerts the 250-N force on the steering knuckle AO as shown. Replace this force by an
equivalent force–couple system at O.
10°

F = 250 N
235 mm

8N

y

30°
B
x
O

A

50 mm

15°
A
15°
B

O

30°
8N
375 mm
Problem 2/73
Problem 2/71

2/72 A force F of magnitude 50 N is exerted on the
automobile parking-brake lever at the position
x ϭ 250 mm. Replace the force by an equivalent
force–couple system at the pivot point O.
F

2/74 The 250-N tension is applied to a cord which is securely wrapped around the periphery of the disk.
Determine the equivalent force–couple system at
point C. Begin by ﬁnding the equivalent force–
couple system at A.
120 mm

20°

45°

15°
100

mm

200 mm

A

10°
B

250 N

O
x

400 mm

Problem 2/72

C

60°

60°

Problem 2/74

D

Article 2/5
2/75 The system consisting of the bar OA, two identical
pulleys, and a section of thin tape is subjected to the
two 180-N tensile forces shown in the ﬁgure. Determine the equivalent force–couple system at point O.
180 N
A

Problems

57

2/77 The device shown is a part of an automobile seatback-release mechanism. The part is subjected to
the 4-N force exerted at A and a 300-N ⅐ mm restoring moment exerted by a hidden torsional spring.
Determine the y-intercept of the line of action of the
single equivalent force.

r

y

F=4N

10 mm

r = 25 mm

15°
A
40 mm

100 mm
r
180 N
O

x
300 N·mm

45°

O

50 mm
Problem 2/77
Problem 2/75

2/76 Points A and B are the midpoints of the sides of the
rectangle. Replace the given force F acting at A by a
force–couple system at B.

2/78 The force F acts along line MA, where M is the midpoint of the radius along the x-axis. Determine the
equivalent force–couple system at O if ␪ ϭ 40Њ.
y
F

y

F
A

A
θ

h

O

B

x

M

x

O
b
Problem 2/76

R
––
2

R
––
2

Problem 2/78

58

Chapter 2

Force Systems

2/6

The properties of force, moment, and couple were developed in the
previous four articles. Now we are ready to describe the resultant action of
a group or system of forces. Most problems in mechanics deal with a system
of forces, and it is usually necessary to reduce the system to its simplest
form to describe its action. The resultant of a system of forces is the simplest force combination which can replace the original forces without altering the external effect on the rigid body to which the forces are applied.
Equilibrium of a body is the condition in which the resultant of all
forces acting on the body is zero. This condition is studied in statics. When
the resultant of all forces on a body is not zero, the acceleration of the body
is obtained by equating the force resultant to the product of the mass and
acceleration of the body. This condition is studied in dynamics. Thus, the
determination of resultants is basic to both statics and dynamics.
The most common type of force system occurs when the forces all
act in a single plane, say, the x-y plane, as illustrated by the system of
three forces F1, F2, and F3 in Fig. 2/13a. We obtain the magnitude and
direction of the resultant force R by forming the force polygon shown
in part b of the ﬁgure, where the forces are added head-to-tail in any
sequence. Thus, for any system of coplanar forces we may write

F1

F2

F1
R

F2
R1

Resultants

R1
F3

R ϭ F1 ϩ F2 ϩ F3 ϩ ⅐ ⅐ ⅐ ϭ ΣF
F3

Rx ϭ ΣFx

Ry ϭ ΣFy

(a)

␪ ϭ tanϪ1
y

F3 y

F2 y

Ry

F2
F1

R

θ

x

F1 x F2 x
Rx
(b)

Figure 2/13

F3 x

Rx

ϭ tanϪ1

ΣFy

(2/9)

ΣFx

Graphically, the correct line of action of R may be obtained by preserving the correct lines of action of the forces and adding them by the
parallelogram law. We see this in part a of the ﬁgure for the case of
three forces where the sum R1 of F2 and F3 is added to F1 to obtain R.
The principle of transmissibility has been used in this process.

F3

F1 y

Ry

R ϭ Ί(ΣFx)2 ϩ (ΣFy)2

Algebraic Method
We can use algebra to obtain the resultant force and its line of action as follows:
1. Choose a convenient reference point and move all forces to that
point. This process is depicted for a three-force system in Figs.
2/14a and b, where M1, M2, and M3 are the couples resulting from
the transfer of forces F1, F2, and F3 from their respective original
lines of action to lines of action through point O.
2. Add all forces at O to form the resultant force R, and add all couples
to form the resultant couple MO. We now have the single force–
couple system, as shown in Fig. 2/14c.
3. In Fig. 2/14d, ﬁnd the line of action of R by requiring R to have a
moment of MO about point O. Note that the force systems of Figs.
2/14a and 2/14d are equivalent, and that Σ(Fd) in Fig. 2/14a is equal
to Rd in Fig. 2/14d.

Article 2/6

Resultants

F1

F2

M1 = F1d1 F1
F2

d1 d3
O

O d2

F3
M2 = F2 d2
F3

M3 = F3 d3
(b)

(a)

MO = Σ(Fd)

R

R = ΣF

d
MO
d = –—
R

O

O

(c)

(d)

Figure 2/14
Principle of Moments
\input{
Meriam-EngineeringMechanics-Statics_p59.png
}
(2/10)

Rd ϭ MO
The ﬁrst two of Eqs. 2/10 reduce a given system of forces to a force–
couple system at an arbitrarily chosen but convenient point O. The last
equation speciﬁes the distance d from point O to the line of action of R,
and states that the moment of the resultant force about any point O
equals the sum of the moments of the original forces of the system about
the same point. This extends Varignon’s theorem to the case of nonconcurrent force systems; we call this extension the principle of moments.
For a concurrent system of forces where the lines of action of all
forces pass through a common point O, the moment sum ΣMO about
that point is zero. Thus, the line of action of the resultant R ϭ ΣF, determined by the first of Eqs. 2/10, passes through point O. For a parallel force system, select a coordinate axis in the direction of the forces.
If the resultant force R for a given force system is zero, the resultant
of the system need not be zero because the resultant may be a couple.
The three forces in Fig. 2/15, for instance, have a zero resultant force
but have a resultant clockwise couple M ϭ F3d.

F1

F1 + F2 = – F3

F1
F2
F2
d
F3

Figure 2/15

59

60

Chapter 2

Force Systems

SAMPLE PROBLEM 2/9

y

Determine the resultant of the four forces and one couple which act on the
plate shown.

2m

5m

60 N
50 N
45°

Solution. Point O is selected as a convenient reference point for the force–couple
system which is to represent the given system.
[Rx ϭ ΣFx]

Rx ϭ 40 ϩ 80 cos 30Њ Ϫ 60 cos 45Њ ϭ 66.9 N

2m

[Ry ϭ ΣFy]

Ry ϭ 50 ϩ 80 sin 30Њ ϩ 60 cos 45Њ ϭ 132.4 N

140 N·m

2m

[R ϭ ΊRx2 ϩ Ry2]

΄

␪ ϭ tanϪ1

Ry

΅

ᕡ [MO ϭ Σ(Fd)]

O

40 N
1m

R ϭ Ί(66.9)2 ϩ (132.4)2 ϭ 148.3 N
132.4
ϭ 63.2Њ
66.9

30°

Ans.
Ans.

␪ ϭ tanϪ1

Rx

80 N

y
R = 148.3 N

MO ϭ 140 Ϫ 50(5) ϩ 60 cos 45Њ(4) Ϫ 60 sin 45Њ(7)
(a)

ϭ Ϫ237 N ⅐ m
The force–couple system consisting of R and MO is shown in Fig. a.
We now determine the ﬁnal line of action of R such that R alone represents
the original system.
[Rd ϭ ͉MO͉]

148.3d ϭ 237

d ϭ 1.600 m

Ans.

Hence, the resultant R may be applied at any point on the line which makes a
63.2Њ angle with the x-axis and is tangent at point A to a circle of 1.600-m radius
with center O, as shown in part b of the ﬁgure. We apply the equation Rd ϭ MO in
an absolute-value sense (ignoring any sign of MO) and let the physics of the situation, as depicted in Fig. a, dictate the ﬁnal placement of R. Had MO been counterclockwise, the correct line of action of R would have been the tangent at point B.
The resultant R may also be located by determining its intercept distance b
to point C on the x-axis, Fig. c. With Rx and Ry acting through point C, only Ry
exerts a moment about O so that
Ry b ϭ ͉MO͉

and

bϭ

(b)

where r ϭ xi ϩ yj is a position vector running from point O to any point on the
line of action of R. Substituting the vector expressions for r, R, and MO and carrying out the cross product result in
(xi ϩ yj) ؋ (66.9i ϩ 132.4j) ϭ Ϫ237k
(132.4x Ϫ 66.9y)k ϭ Ϫ237k
Thus, the desired line of action, Fig. c, is given by
132.4x Ϫ 66.9y ϭ Ϫ237

ᕢ By setting y ϭ 0, we obtain x ϭ Ϫ1.792 m, which agrees with our earlier calculation of the distance b.

63.2°

1.600 m
A
O

(c)

132.4 x – 66.9 y =
–237

x
B

y

C
O
R

r ؋ R ϭ MO

x

O

R = 148.3 N

237
ϭ 1.792 m
132.4

Alternatively, the y-intercept could have been obtained by noting that the moment about O would be due to Rx only.
A more formal approach in determining the ﬁnal line of action of R is to use
the vector expression

θ = 63.2°

|MO| =
237 N·m

x

b

Helpful Hints

ᕡ We note that the choice of point O as
a moment center eliminates any moments due to the two forces which
pass through O. Had the clockwise
sign convention been adopted, MO
would have been ϩ237 N ⅐ m, with
the plus sign indicating a sense
which agrees with the sign convention. Either sign convention, of
course, leads to the conclusion of a
clockwise moment MO.

ᕢ Note that the vector approach
yields sign information automatically, whereas the scalar approach
is more physically oriented. You
should master both methods.

x

Article 2/6

PROBLEMS
Introductory Problems
2/79 Two rods and one cable are attached to the support
at O. If two of the forces are as shown, determine
the magnitude F and direction ␪ of the third force so
that the resultant of the three forces is vertically
downward with a magnitude of 1200 lb.

y

y

y

F

F
F

d

x

O

F

F

61

2/81 Determine the equivalent force–couple system at
the center O for each of the three cases of forces
being applied along the edges of a square plate of
side d.

x

O

x

O

F

y

1000 lb

Problems

d
(a)

500 lb

θ

d

F

(b)

d
(c)

Problem 2/81
45°

30°

x

O

2/82 Determine the equivalent force–couple system at
the origin O for each of the three cases of forces
being applied along the edges of a regular hexagon
of width d. If the resultant can be so expressed, replace this force–couple system with a single force.

Problem 2/79
y

2/80 Determine the resultant R of the three tension
forces acting on the eye bolt. Find the magnitude of
R and the angle ␪x which R makes with the positive
x-axis.

F
d

y

F

F
x

O

F

y
F
x

O

F

F

F

d

F

x

O

F
d

20 kN
(a)

y

(b)

(c)

Problem 2/82
30°

2/83 Where does the resultant of the two forces act?
680 N
x
300
mm

45°

500
mm
A

8 kN
4 kN
Problem 2/80

660 N
Problem 2/83

62

Chapter 2

Force Systems

2/84 Determine and locate the resultant R of the two
forces and one couple acting on the I-beam.
8 kN

25 kN⋅m

x

2/87 The ﬂanged steel cantilever beam with riveted
bracket is subjected to the couple and two forces
shown, and their effect on the design of the attachment at A must be determined. Replace the two
forces and couple by an equivalent couple M and
resultant force R at A.
2 kN
0.5 m

1.5 m
2m

2m

70°

2m

A

5 kN

0.15 m
0.15 m

y

Problem 2/84

500 N⋅m

x

2/85 Replace the two forces acting on the bent pipe by a
single equivalent force R. Specify the distance y from
point A to the line of action of R.

3
4

1.2 kN

Problem 2/87

2/88 If the resultant of the two forces and couple M passes
through point O, determine M.

120 N
0
15 m
m

80 mm
200 N

60°

0
15 m
m

30°

M

y
160 mm

O

A

x

320 N

160
mm

100 mm

400 N
Problem 2/88

Problem 2/85

2/86 Under nonuniform and slippery road conditions, the
two forces shown are exerted on the two rear-drive
wheels of the pickup truck, which has a limited-slip
rear differential. Determine the y-intercept of the
resultant of this force system.

2/89 Replace the three forces which act on the bent bar
by a force–couple system at the support point A.
Then determine the x-intercept of the line of action
of the stand-alone resultant force R.
y
2500 lb

y
4′
50 lb
A

B

x

30°

1200 lb

C

30؆
G

x

30؆

2′
800 lb

100 lb

D

Problem 2/89
67؆
Problem 2/86

45؆

E

2′
3′

Article 2/6
2/90 A commercial airliner with four jet engines, each
producing 90 kN of forward thrust, is in a steady,
level cruise when engine number 3 suddenly fails.
Determine and locate the resultant of the three remaining engine thrust vectors. Treat this as a twodimensional problem.

Problems

63

2/92 Determine the x- and y-axis intercepts of the line of
action of the resultant of the three loads applied to
the gearset.
y
2.4 kN
20° 1.5 kN

20°
120 mm

4

200 mm

90 kN

O

x

9m

3

12 m

300 mm
20°
3.6 kN

12 m
90 kN

Problem 2/92
2

9m

2/93 Determine the resultant R of the three forces acting
on the simple truss. Specify the points on the x- and
y-axes through which R must pass.

90 kN
1

30°
Problem 2/90
20 kN

25 kN

Representative Problems
2/91 The directions of the two thrust vectors of an experimental aircraft can be independently changed from
the conventional forward direction within limits.
For the thrust conﬁguration shown, determine the
equivalent force–couple system at point O. Then replace this force–couple system by a single force and
specify the point on the x-axis through which the
line of action of this resultant passes. These results
are vital to assessing design performance.
y
10 m

T

A

3m
O
3m
B

15°
T

Problem 2/91

x

y

O

5m
3m

6m

30 kN
Problem 2/93

3m

x

64

Chapter 2

Force Systems

2/94 The asymmetric roof truss is of the type used when
a near normal angle of incidence of sunlight onto
the south-facing surface ABC is desirable for solar
energy purposes. The ﬁve vertical loads represent
the effect of the weights of the truss and supported
rooﬁng materials. The 400-N load represents the
effect of wind pressure. Determine the equivalent
force–couple system at A. Also, compute the x-intercept of the line of action of the system resultant
treated as a single force R.

2/96 While sliding a desk toward the doorway, three students exert the forces shown in the overhead view.
Determine the equivalent force–couple system at
point A. Then determine the equation of the line of
action of the resultant force.
y
60″
15 lb

25 lb

500 N
30″
500 N
A

C
400 N
y

500 N

D

B

250 N
E

250 N
A

x

20 lb

60°

30°

30°

30°

F

G
5m

Problem 2/96

x

5m
Problem 2/94

2/95 As part of a design test, the camshaft–drive sprocket
is ﬁxed and then the two forces shown are applied to
a length of belt wrapped around the sprocket. Find
the resultant of this system of two forces and determine where its line of action intersects both the
x- and y-axes.

2/97 Under nonuniform and slippery road conditions, the
four forces shown are exerted on the four drive
wheels of the all-wheel-drive vehicle. Determine the
resultant of this system and the x- and y-intercepts
of its line of action. Note that the front and rear
tracks are equal (i.e., AB ϭ CD).
y
300 N

B

C

30°
760 mm

150 N
x

y

G

760 mm
30°

60 mm
300 N

D

A
200 N
1520 mm

1120 mm

x

O

Problem 2/97

15°
45°
T2 = 500 N
T1 = 400 N
Problem 2/95

Article 2/6
2/98 A rear-wheel-drive car is stuck in the snow between
other parked cars as shown. In an attempt to free
the car, three students exert forces on the car at
points A, B, and C while the driver’s actions result
in a forward thrust of 40 lb acting parallel to the
plane of rotation of each rear wheel. Treating the
problem as two-dimensional, determine the equivalent force–couple system at the car center of mass G
and locate the position x of the point on the car centerline through which the resultant passes. Neglect
all forces not shown.

Problems

2/100 The pedal–chainwheel unit of a bicycle is shown in
the ﬁgure. The left foot of the rider exerts the 40-lb
force, while the use of toe clips allows the right foot
to exert the nearly upward 20-lb force. Determine
the equivalent force–couple system at point O.
Also, determine the equation of the line of action of
the system resultant treated as a single force R.
Treat the problem as two-dimensional.

y
40 lb
33″
80 lb
33″

x

G

A

y

72″

B

C
66″

30°
50 lb

O

FC

FD

FB

30°
C

O

A
Wh
0.2

30°
D

B
Wm

0.65

r = 0.35

Wt
0.65

0.5

Dimensions in meters
Problem 2/99

15°

A

2/99 An exhaust system for a pickup truck is shown in
the ﬁgure. The weights Wh, Wm, and Wt of the headpipe, mufﬂer, and tailpipe are 10, 100, and 50 N,
respectively, and act at the indicated points. If the
exhaust-pipe hanger at point A is adjusted so that
its tension FA is 50 N, determine the required forces
in the hangers at points B, C, and D so that the
force–couple system at point O is zero. Why is a zero
force–couple system at O desirable?

FA

x

70 lb

Problem 2/98

0.5

30°

B

40 lb

0.4

65

40 lb
6.5″

20 lb
6.5″
5°
Problem 2/100

66

Chapter 2

Force Systems

SECTION B
2/7

Fx ϭ F cos ␪x

θy

θz
O

θx

k

F ϭ F xi ϩ F y j ϩ F z k

Fz ϭ F cos ␪z

y

F ϭ ΊFx2 ϩ Fy2 ϩ Fz2

Fy ϭ F cos ␪y

F

Fz k

i

Rectangular Components

Many problems in mechanics require analysis in three dimensions,
and for such problems it is often necessary to resolve a force into its
three mutually perpendicular components. The force F acting at point O
in Fig. 2/16 has the rectangular components Fx, Fy, Fz, where

z

j

THREE-DIMENSIONAL FORCE SYSTEMS

F ϭ F(i cos ␪x ϩ j cos ␪y ϩ k cos ␪z)

(2/11)

Fy j

The unit vectors i, j, and k are in the x-, y-, and z-directions, respectively. Using the direction cosines of F, which are l ϭ cos ␪x, m ϭ cos ␪y,
and n ϭ cos ␪z, where l2 ϩ m2 ϩ n2 ϭ 1, we may write the force as

Fx i
x

Figure 2/16

F ϭ F(li ϩ mj ϩ nk)

(2/12)

We may regard the right-side expression of Eq. 2/12 as the force
magnitude F times a unit vector nF which characterizes the direction of
F, or
F ϭ FnF

z

(2/12a)

It is clear from Eqs. 2/12 and 2/12a that nF ϭ li ϩ mj ϩ nk, which
shows that the scalar components of the unit vector nF are the direction
cosines of the line of action of F.
In solving three-dimensional problems, one must usually ﬁnd the x,
y, and z scalar components of a force. In most cases, the direction of a
force is described (a) by two points on the line of action of the force or
B (x2, y2, z2) (b) by two angles which orient the line of action.

⎫
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎬ (z – z1)
A (x1, y1, z1) ⎪ 2
⎪
⎪
⎭
F

(a) Speciﬁcation by two points on the line of action of the force.
If the coordinates of points A and B of Fig. 2/17 are known, the force F
may be written as

⎫
⎬
⎭

x

⎫
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎭

y
(x2 – x1)

F ϭ FnF ϭ F

l
(x2 Ϫ x1)i ϩ (y2 Ϫ y1)j ϩ (z2 Ϫ z1)k
AB
ϭF
AB
Ί(x2 Ϫ x1)2 ϩ (y2 Ϫ y1)2 ϩ (z2 Ϫ z1)2

(y2 – y1)

Figure 2/17

Thus the x, y, and z scalar components of F are the scalar coefﬁcients of
the unit vectors i, j, and k, respectively.

Article 2/7

(b) Speciﬁcation by two angles which orient the line of action
of the force. Consider the geometry of Fig. 2/18. We assume that the
angles ␪ and ␾ are known. First resolve F into horizontal and vertical
components.

Rectangular Components

67

z
Fz

Fxy ϭ F cos ␾
Fz ϭ F sin ␾

F

Then resolve the horizontal component Fxy into x- and y-components.

φ
Fy

Fx ϭ Fxy cos ␪ ϭ F cos ␾ cos ␪

Fx

Fy ϭ Fxy sin ␪ ϭ F cos ␾ sin ␪

x

The quantities Fx, Fy, and Fz are the desired scalar components of F.
The choice of orientation of the coordinate system is arbitrary, with
convenience being the primary consideration. However, we must use a
right-handed set of axes in our three-dimensional work to be consistent
with the right-hand-rule deﬁnition of the cross product. When we rotate
from the x- to the y-axis through the 90Њ angle, the positive direction for
the z-axis in a right-handed system is that of the advancement of a
right-handed screw rotated in the same sense. This is equivalent to the
right-hand rule.

Dot Product
We can express the rectangular components of a force F (or any
other vector) with the aid of the vector operation known as the dot or
scalar product (see item 6 in Art. C/7 of Appendix C). The dot product of
two vectors P and Q, Fig. 2/19a, is deﬁned as the product of their magnitudes times the cosine of the angle ␣ between them. It is written as
P ⅐ Q ϭ PQ cos ␣
We can view this product either as the orthogonal projection P cos ␣ of
P in the direction of Q multiplied by Q, or as the orthogonal projection
Q cos ␣ of Q in the direction of P multiplied by P. In either case the dot
product of the two vectors is a scalar quantity. Thus, for instance, we
can express the scalar component Fx ϭ F cos ␪x of the force F in Fig.
2/16 as Fx ϭ F ⅐ i, where i is the unit vector in the x-direction.

F

P

α

· nn
Fn = F

Q

·n
Fn = F

(a)

(b)

Figure 2/19

n (unit vector)

y

θ
Fxy

Figure 2/18

68

Chapter 2

Force Systems

In more general terms, if n is a unit vector in a speciﬁed direction,
the projection of F in the n-direction, Fig. 2/19b, has the magnitude
Fn ϭ F ⅐ n. If we want to express the projection in the n-direction as a
vector quantity, then we multiply its scalar component, expressed by
F ⅐ n, by the unit vector n to give Fn ϭ (F ⅐ n)n. We may write this as
Fn ϭ F ⅐ nn without ambiguity because the term nn is not deﬁned, and
so the complete expression cannot be misinterpreted as F ⅐ (nn).
If the direction cosines of n are ␣, ␤, and ␥, then we may write n in
vector component form like any other vector as
n ϭ ␣i ϩ ␤j ϩ ␥k
where in this case its magnitude is unity. If the direction cosines of F
with respect to reference axes x-y-z are l, m, and n, then the projection
of F in the n-direction becomes
Fn ϭ F ⅐ n ϭ F(li ϩ mj ϩ nk) ⅐ (␣i ϩ ␤j ϩ ␥k)
ϭ F(l␣ ϩ m␤ ϩ n␥)
because
i ⅐ i ϭ j ⅐ j ϭ k ⅐ k ϭ1
and
i⅐j ϭ j⅐i ϭ i⅐k ϭ k⅐i ϭ j⅐k ϭ k⅐j ϭ 0
The latter two sets of equations are true because i, j, and k have unit
length and are mutually perpendicular.

Angle between Two Vectors
If the angle between the force F and the direction speciﬁed by the
unit vector n is ␪, then from the dot-product deﬁnition we have F ⅐ n ϭ
Fn cos ␪ ϭ F cos ␪, where ͉n͉ ϭ n ϭ 1. Thus, the angle between F and n
is given by
␪ ϭ cosϪ1

F⅐n
F

(2/13)

In general, the angle between any two vectors P and Q is
␪ ϭ cosϪ1
P

P′
α

Q

Figure 2/20

P⅐Q
PQ

(2/13a)

If a force F is perpendicular to a line whose direction is speciﬁed by the
unit vector n, then cos ␪ ϭ 0, and F ⅐ n ϭ 0. Note that this relationship
does not mean that either F or n is zero, as would be the case with
scalar multiplication where (A)(B) ϭ 0 requires that either A or B (or
both) be zero.
The dot-product relationship applies to nonintersecting vectors as
well as to intersecting vectors. Thus, the dot product of the nonintersecting vectors P and Q in Fig. 2/20 is Q times the projection of PЈ on Q,
or PЈQ cos ␣ ϭ PQ cos ␣ because PЈ and P are the same when treated as
free vectors.

Article 2/7

Rectangular Components

SAMPLE PROBLEM 2/10

69

F = 100 N
z

A force F with a magnitude of 100 N is applied at the origin O of the axes
x-y-z as shown. The line of action of F passes through a point A whose coordinates are 3 m, 4 m, and 5 m. Determine (a) the x, y, and z scalar components of
F, (b) the projection Fxy of F on the x-y plane, and (c) the projection FOB of F
along the line OB.

4m
A

y

B

5m
2m
6m

Part (a). We begin by writing the force vector F as its magnitude
F times a unit vector nOA.

Solution.

l

΄

3i ϩ 4j ϩ 5k

O

΅

3m

6m

OA
ϭ 100
F ϭ FnOA ϭ F
OA
Ί32 ϩ 42 ϩ 52

x

ϭ 100[0.424i ϩ 0.566j ϩ 0.707k]

z
F

ϭ 42.4i ϩ 56.6j ϩ 70.7k N
The desired scalar components are thus

ᕡ

Fx ϭ 42.4 N
Part (b).

Fz

Fy ϭ 56.6 N

Fz ϭ 70.7 N

y

The cosine of the angle ␪xy between F and the x-y plane is
cos ␪xy ϭ

Ί32

ϩ

42

Ί32 ϩ 42 ϩ 52

Fy

ϭ 0.707

so that Fxy ϭ F cos ␪xy ϭ 100(0.707) ϭ 70.7 N
Part (c).

Ans.

θ xy

Ans.

Fxy = 70.7 N

O
Fx

The unit vector nOB along OB is
l

nOB ϭ

x

6i ϩ 6j ϩ 2k

OB
ϭ
ϭ 0.688i ϩ 0.688j ϩ 0.229k
OB
Ί62 ϩ 62 ϩ 22

F

The scalar projection of F on OB is

ᕢ

FOB ϭ F ⅐ nOB ϭ (42.4i ϩ 56.6j ϩ 70.7k) ⅐ (0.688i ϩ 0.688j ϩ 0.229k)
z

ϭ (42.4)(0.688) ϩ (56.6)(0.688) ϩ (70.7)(0.229)
ϭ 84.4 N

nOB

Ans.
y

If we wish to express the projection as a vector, we write
FOB ϭ F ⅐ nOBnOB

FOB = 84.4 N
O
x

ϭ 84.4(0.688i ϩ 0.688j ϩ 0.229k)
ϭ 58.1i ϩ 58.1j ϩ 19.35k N

Helpful Hints

ᕡ In this example all scalar components
are positive. Be prepared for the case
where a direction cosine, and hence
the scalar component, are negative.

ᕢ The dot product automatically ﬁnds
the projection or scalar component
of F along line OB as shown.

70

Chapter 2

Force Systems

PROBLEMS
Introductory Problems
2/101 Express the 900-lb force F as a vector in terms of
the unit vectors i, j, and k. Determine the projection of F onto the y-axis.

2/104 In checking a recently installed fencepost for adequacy of the ground support, a person exerts a force
P ϭ Ϫ160i ϩ 40j ϩ 60k N on the top of the post as
shown. Determine the angles which P makes with
the positive x-axis and with the x-z plane.
y

y, in.
P
B (60, 30, 40)
O

x

A (–48, –25, 20)
z

F = 900 lb
x, in.
z, in.
Problem 2/101

2/102 Express the 5-kN force F as a vector in terms of
the unit vectors i, j, and k. Determine the projections of F onto the x-axis and onto the line OA.
z

Problem 2/104

2/105 The turnbuckle is tightened until the tension in
the cable AB equals 2.4 kN. Determine the vector
expression for the tension T as a force acting on
member AD. Also ﬁnd the magnitude of the projection of T along the line AC.

F = 5 kN

z

35°

O

D

60°

y

30°
A

x

A
Problem 2/102

2/103 The cable exerts a tension of 2 kN on the ﬁxed
bracket at A. Write the vector expression for the
tension T.

5m

z
0.5 m
B

0.4 m

C

y

O

x

1m
2 kN

3m
2m

O

y

B

A

Problem 2/105
0.3 m
1.2 m

Problem 2/103

x

2/106 The unstretched length of the spring is b. Determine
the force which the spring exerts on point B of
the space frame if b ϭ 0.3 m. The magnitude of the
spring force is the spring constant k multiplied by the
deﬂection (lengthening or shortening) of the spring.

Article 2/7

Problems

71

vertical side OB of the parallelepiped. Express F as
its magnitude times the appropriate unit vector
and determine its x-, y-, and z-scalar components.

z

b

1.5b

z

B

B
k = 400 N/m
b
M
A

16″

F = 500 lb

O
x

A
10″

b

16″
y

O
x

Problem 2/109

y
Problem 2/106

2/107 The rigid pole and cross-arm assembly is supported
by the three cables shown. A turnbuckle at D is
tightened until it induces a tension T in CD of 1.2
kN. Express T as a vector. Does it make any difference in the result which coordinate system is used?

2/110 The force F has a magnitude of 2 kN and is directed from A to B. Calculate the projection FCD of
F onto line CD and determine the angle ␪ between
F and CD.
B

F

z′
0.2 m

z

B

1.5

C

m

C
0.2 m
A
0.2 m

y′
G

x′

1m

1.5 m

D
0.4 m

Problem 2/110
A

2/111 The cable BC carries a tension of 750 N. Write this
tension as a force T acting on point B in terms of
the unit vectors i, j, and k. The elbow at A forms a
right angle.

T = 1.2 kN
3m
2m

F
1m

E

.5 m

y

1

O

3m

x

m
1.2

D
y
C

Problem 2/107

O

1.6 m

0.7 m

2/108 Use the result cited for Prob. 2/107 and determine the
magnitude TGF of the projection of T onto line GF.

A
z

30°

Representative Problems
2/109 The force F has a magnitude of 500 lb and acts
along the line AM, where M is the midpoint of the

B
Problem 2/111

0.8 m

x

72

Chapter 2

Force Systems

2/112 The tension in the supporting cable BC is 800 lb.
Write the force which this cable exerts on the boom
OAB as a vector T. Determine the angles ␪x, ␪y, and
␪z which the line of action of T forms with the positive x-, y-, and z-axes.

C4

00

mm

E

D

12

T = 300 N

z

00

m
m

25°

4′
D

B

6′

A

C
1′

Problem 2/114

O
2′

A

B
x

7′

y

2.5′

1.5′

2.5′

2/115 An overhead crane is used to reposition the boxcar
within a railroad car-repair shop. If the boxcar begins to move along the rails when the x-component of
the cable tension reaches 600 lb, calculate the necessary tension T in the cable. Determine the angle ␪xy
between the cable and the vertical x-y plane.

Problem 2/112

y

2/113 Determine the angle ␪ between the 200-lb force
and line OC.

T

z

4
5
1

z

x

B

A
x

Problem 2/115

8′′

F = 200 lb

O

2/116 The access door is held in the 30Њ open position by
the chain AB. If the tension in the chain is 100 N,
determine the projection of the tension force onto
the diagonal axis CD of the door.

y
12′′

24′′
C

B

Problem 2/113

2/114 The rectangular plate is supported by hinges along
its side BC and by the cable AE. If the cable tension is 300 N, determine the projection onto line
BC of the force exerted on the plate by the cable.
Note that E is the midpoint of the horizontal upper
edge of the structural support.

900
mm
900 mm
00

mm

12

A
C

30°

Problem 2/116

D

Article 2/7
2/117 The shafts and attached brackets are twisted in opposite directions to maintain a tension T of 500 N
in the wire joining A and B. Express the tension,
considered as a force acting on A, as a vector in the
form of Eq. 2/12 and determine the projection of T
onto the line DC.

Problems

73

᭤2/119 The power line is strung from the power-pole arm
at A to point B on the same horizontal plane. Because of the sag of the cable in the vertical plane,
the cable makes an angle of 15Њ with the horizontal
where it attaches to A. If the cable tension at A is
200 lb, write T as a vector and determine the magnitude of its projection onto the x-z plane.

y
z
C

B
4.5′

30′

100
mm

mm
140

C
120
mm

O

T

A

18′

15°

D
90
mm

z

B

x
y

T
A

x

40°
O

Problem 2/117

᭤2/118 A force F is applied to the surface of the sphere
as shown. The angles ␪ and ␾ locate point P, and
point M is the midpoint of ON. Express F in vector
form, using the given x-, y-, and z-coordinates.
z

Problem 2/119

᭤2/120 Determine the x-, y-, and z-components of force F
which acts on the tetrahedron as shown. The quantities a, b, c, and F are known, and M is the midpoint of edge AB.
z

F
C

φ

R

P
c

O

θ

y

M

B
b

N

O
M

a

x
Problem 2/118

y
F

A
x
Problem 2/120

74

Chapter 2

Force Systems

2/8

Moment and Couple

In two-dimensional analyses it is often convenient to determine a
moment magnitude by scalar multiplication using the moment-arm
rule. In three dimensions, however, the determination of the perpendicular distance between a point or line and the line of action of the force
can be a tedious computation. A vector approach with cross-product
multiplication then becomes advantageous.

MO

r
O

α

d

A

F
(a)

MO
F

α
A

O

(b)

Figure 2/21

r

Moments in Three Dimensions
Consider a force F with a given line of action acting on a body, Fig.
2/21a, and any point O not on this line. Point O and the line of F establish a plane A. The moment MO of F about an axis through O normal to
the plane has the magnitude MO ϭ Fd, where d is the perpendicular distance from O to the line of F. This moment is also referred to as the moment of F about the point O.
The vector MO is normal to the plane and is directed along the axis
through O. We can describe both the magnitude and the direction of MO
by the vector cross-product relation introduced in Art. 2/4. (Refer to
item 7 in Art. C/7 of Appendix C.) The vector r runs from O to any point
on the line of action of F. As described in Art. 2/4, the cross product of r
and F is written r ؋ F and has the magnitude (r sin ␣)F, which is the
same as Fd, the magnitude of MO.
The correct direction and sense of the moment are established by
the right-hand rule, described previously in Arts. 2/4 and 2/5. Thus,
with r and F treated as free vectors emanating from O, Fig. 2/21b, the
thumb points in the direction of MO if the ﬁngers of the right hand curl
in the direction of rotation from r to F through the angle ␣. Therefore,
we may write the moment of F about the axis through O as
MO ϭ r ؋ F

(2/14)

The order r ؋ F of the vectors must be maintained because F ؋ r
would produce a vector with a sense opposite to that of MO; that is,
F ؋ r ϭ ϪMO.

Evaluating the Cross Product
The cross-product expression for MO may be written in the determinant form

ͯ

i
MO ϭ rx
Fx

j
ry

k
rz

Fy Fz

ͯ

(2/15)

(Refer to item 7 in Art. C/7 of Appendix C if you are not already familiar
with the determinant representation of the cross product.) Note the
symmetry and order of the terms, and note that a right-handed coordinate system must be used. Expansion of the determinant gives
MO ϭ (ry Fz Ϫ rz Fy)i ϩ (rz Fx Ϫ rx Fz)j ϩ (rx Fy Ϫ ry Fx)k

Article 2/8

To gain more confidence in the cross-product relationship, examine the three components of the moment of a force about a point as
obtained from Fig. 2/22. This figure shows the three components of a
force F acting at a point A located relative to O by the vector r. The
scalar magnitudes of the moments of these forces about the positive
x-, y-, and z-axes through O can be obtained from the moment-arm
rule, and are

Moment and Couple

F
Fz
z

My ϭ rz Fx Ϫ rx Fz

y

rz

M z ϭ rx F y Ϫ ry F x

Fx

My

rx
ry

O

which agree with the respective terms in the determinant expansion for
the cross product r ؋ F.

Moment about an Arbitrary Axis
We can now obtain an expression for the moment M␭ of F about any
axis ␭ through O, as shown in Fig. 2/23. If n is a unit vector in the
␭-direction, then we can use the dot-product expression for the component of a vector as described in Art. 2/7 to obtain MO ⅐ n, the component
of MO in the direction of ␭. This scalar is the magnitude of the moment
M␭ of F about ␭.
To obtain the vector expression for the moment M␭ of F about ␭,
multiply the magnitude by the directional unit vector n to obtain

Fy

A
Mz
r

Mx ϭ ry F z Ϫ r z F y

x
Mx

Figure 2/22
λ
MO

n
F
Mλ
r
O

M␭ ϭ (r ؋ F ⅐ n)n

(2/16)

where r ؋ F replaces MO. The expression r ؋ F ⅐ n is known as a triple
scalar product (see item 8 in Art. C/7, Appendix C). It need not be written (r ؋ F) ⅐ n because a cross product cannot be formed by a vector and
a scalar. Thus, the association r ؋ (F ⅐ n) would have no meaning.
The triple scalar product may be represented by the determinant

ͯ

rx

͉M␭͉ ϭ M␭ ϭ Fx
␣

ry

rz

Fy Fz
␤

␥

ͯ

Figure 2/23

(2/17)

where ␣, ␤, ␥ are the direction cosines of the unit vector n.

Varignon’s Theorem in Three Dimensions
In Art. 2/4 we introduced Varignon’s theorem in two dimensions.
The theorem is easily extended to three dimensions. Figure 2/24 shows a
system of concurrent forces F1, F2, F3, . . . . The sum of the moments
about O of these forces is

F3
F2

O

r

A

r ؋ F1 ϩ r ؋ F2 ϩ r ؋ F3 ϩ ⅐ ⅐ ⅐ ϭ r ؋ (F1 ϩ F2 ϩ F3 ϩ ⅐ ⅐ ⅐ )
ϭ r ؋ ΣF

75

Figure 2/24

F1

76

Chapter 2

Force Systems

where we have used the distributive law for cross products. Using the
symbol MO to represent the sum of the moments on the left side of the
above equation, we have
MO ϭ Σ(r ؋ F) ϭ r ؋ R

(2/18)

This equation states that the sum of the moments of a system of concurrent forces about a given point equals the moment of their sum about
the same point. As mentioned in Art. 2/4, this principle has many applications in mechanics.

M

d
F

–F
B

r

A

Couples in Three Dimensions
The concept of the couple was introduced in Art. 2/5 and is easily
extended to three dimensions. Figure 2/25 shows two equal and opposite
forces F and ϪF acting on a body. The vector r runs from any point B
on the line of action of ϪF to any point A on the line of action of F.
Points A and B are located by position vectors rA and rB from any point
O. The combined moment of the two forces about O is

rA

M ϭ rA ؋ F ϩ rB ؋ (ϪF) ϭ (rA Ϫ rB) ؋ F

O

rB

However, rA Ϫ rB ϭ r, so that all reference to the moment center O disappears, and the moment of the couple becomes

Figure 2/25

Mϭr؋F

(2/19)

Thus, the moment of a couple is the same about all points. The magnitude of M is M ϭ Fd, where d is the perpendicular distance between the
lines of action of the two forces, as described in Art. 2/5.
The moment of a couple is a free vector, whereas the moment of a
force about a point (which is also the moment about a deﬁned axis
through the point) is a sliding vector whose direction is along the axis
through the point. As in the case of two dimensions, a couple tends to
produce a pure rotation of the body about an axis normal to the plane of
the forces which constitute the couple.
Couple vectors obey all of the rules which govern vector quantities.
Thus, in Fig. 2/26 the couple vector M1 due to F1 and ϪF1 may be added

M

M1

M1

–F1
F1
F2

M2

≡

M2

–F2

Figure 2/26

–F

F

Article 2/8

Moment and Couple

77

© Mark Hunt/Index Stock/Age Fotostock America, Inc.

as shown to the couple vector M2 due to F2 and ϪF2 to produce the couple M, which, in turn, can be produced by F and ϪF.
In Art. 2/5 we learned how to replace a force by its equivalent
force–couple system. You should also be able to carry out this replacement in three dimensions. The procedure is represented in Fig. 2/27,
where the force F acting on a rigid body at point A is replaced by an
equal force at point B and the couple M ϭ r ؋ F. By adding the equal
and opposite forces F and ϪF at B, we obtain the couple composed of
ϪF and the original F. Thus, we see that the couple vector is simply the
moment of the original force about the point to which the force is being
moved. We emphasize that r is a vector which runs from B to any point
on the line of action of the original force passing through A.
M=r×F
F

F

A
B

≡

F
B

A

r

–F

Figure 2/27

≡

F
B
The three-dimensionality of the cable
system on the Leonard P. Zakim Bunker
Hill Bridge is evident in this view.

78

Chapter 2

Force Systems

SAMPLE PROBLEM 2/11

z

Determine the moment of force F about point O (a) by inspection and (b) by
the formal cross-product deﬁnition MO ϭ r ؋ F.

b

a
F

(a) Because F is parallel to the y-axis, F has no moment about that
axis. It should be clear that the moment arm from the x-axis to the line of action
of F is c and that the moment of F about the x-axis is negative. Similarly, the
moment arm from the z-axis to the line of action of F is a and the moment of F
about the z-axis is positive. So we have

Solution.

MO ϭ ϪcFi ϩ aFk ϭ F(Ϫci ϩ ak)

c

y

x

Ans.

z

(b) Formally,

ᕡ

O

b

a

MO ϭ r ؋ F ϭ (ai ϩ ck) ؋ Fj ϭ aFk Ϫ cFi
ϭ F(Ϫci ϩ ak)

F

Ans.

r
c

Helpful Hint

O

y

ᕡ Again we stress that r runs from the moment center to the line of action of F.
Another permissible, but less convenient, position vector is r ϭ ai ϩ bj ϩ ck.

x

SAMPLE PROBLEM 2/12

z

The turnbuckle is tightened until the tension in cable AB is 2.4 kN. Determine the moment about point O of the cable force acting on point A and the
magnitude of this moment.

Solution.

1.6 m
A

We begin by writing the described force as a vector.
T ϭ TnAB ϭ 2.4

2m
O

΄Ί0.8 ϩ 1.5 ϩ 2 ΅
0.8i ϩ 1.5j Ϫ 2k
2

2

y

2

x

1.5 m

ϭ 0.731i ϩ 1.371j Ϫ 1.829k kN

B

0.8 m
z

The moment of this force about point O is

ᕡ

1.6 m

MO ϭ rOA ؋ T ϭ (1.6i ϩ 2k) ؋ (0.731i ϩ 1.371j Ϫ 1.829k)
ϭ Ϫ2.74i ϩ 4.39j ϩ 2.19k kN ⅐ m

A

Ans.

rOA

This vector has a magnitude
MO ϭ Ί2.742 ϩ 4.392 ϩ 2.192 ϭ 5.62 kN ⅐ m

T

2m

Ans.

O

Helpful Hint

ᕡ The student should verify by inspection the signs of the moment components.

y
x

1.5 m
B

0.8 m

Article 2/8

Moment and Couple

SAMPLE PROBLEM 2/13

y

A tension T of magnitude 10 kN is applied to the cable attached to the top A
of the rigid mast and secured to the ground at B. Determine the moment Mz of T
about the z-axis passing through the base O.

A

The required moment may be obtained by ﬁnding the component along the z-axis of the moment MO of T about point O. The vector MO is
normal to the plane deﬁned by T and point O, as shown in the accompanying ﬁgure. In the use of Eq. 2/14 to ﬁnd MO, the vector r is any vector from point O to
ᕡ the line of action of T. The simplest choice is the vector from O to A, which is
written as r ϭ 15j m. The vector expression for T is

15 m

Solution (a).

T ϭ TnAB ϭ 10

΄Ί(12) ϩ (Ϫ15) ϩ (9) ΅
2

2

T = 10 kN

O
x
z

12i Ϫ 15j ϩ 9k

9m

12 m
B

2

Helpful Hints

ϭ 10(0.566i Ϫ 0.707j ϩ 0.424k) kN

ᕡ We could also use the vector from O

From Eq. 2/14,
[MO ϭ r ؋ F]

79

to B for r and obtain the same result,
but using vector OA is simpler.

MO ϭ 15j ؋ 10(0.566i Ϫ 0.707j ϩ 0.424k)
ϭ 150(Ϫ0.566k ϩ 0.424i) kN ⅐ m

ᕢ It is always helpful to accompany your

The value Mz of the desired moment is the scalar component of MO in the
z-direction or Mz ϭ MO ⅐ k. Therefore,
Mz ϭ 150(Ϫ0.566k ϩ 0.424i) ⅐ k ϭ Ϫ84.9 kN ⅐ m

vector operations with a sketch of the
vectors so as to retain a clear picture
of the geometry of the problem.

Ans.

ᕢ The minus sign indicates that the vector Mz is in the negative z-direction. Expressed as a vector, the moment is Mz ϭ Ϫ84.9k kN ⅐ m.

ᕣ Sketch the x-y view of the problem
and show d.
y

Solution (b). The force of magnitude T is resolved into components Tz and Txy

A

in the x-y plane. Since Tz is parallel to the z-axis, it can exert no moment about
ᕣ this axis. The moment Mz is, then, due only to Txy and is Mz ϭ Txyd, where d is
the perpendicular distance from Txy to O. The cosine of the angle between T and
Txy is Ί152 ϩ 122 / Ί152 ϩ 122 ϩ 92 ϭ 0.906, and therefore,

Mz

r

Txy ϭ 10(0.906) ϭ 9.06 kN

O

The moment arm d equals OA multiplied by the sine of the angle between Txy
and OA, or
12
d ϭ 15
ϭ 9.37 m
Ί122 ϩ 152

x
z
B

Hence, the moment of T about the z-axis has the magnitude
Mz ϭ 9.06(9.37) ϭ 84.9 kN ⅐ m

Mo

T

y

Ans.

A

Tz

Tx

and is clockwise when viewed in the x-y plane.
Ty

Solution (c). The component Txy is further resolved into its components Tx and
Ty. It is clear that Ty exerts no moment about the z-axis since it passes through it, so
that the required moment is due to Tx alone. The direction cosine of T with respect
to the x-axis is 12/Ί92 ϩ 122 ϩ 152 ϭ 0.566 so that Tx ϭ 10(0.566) ϭ 5.66 kN. Thus,
Mz ϭ 5.66(15) ϭ 84.9 kN ⅐ m

Ans.

Txy 15 m

T
O

z

x
9m

12 m
B

80

Chapter 2

Force Systems

SAMPLE PROBLEM 2/14

30 N

Determine the magnitude and direction of the couple M which will replace
the two given couples and still produce the same external effect on the block.
Specify the two forces F and ϪF, applied in the two faces of the block parallel to
the y-z plane, which may replace the four given forces. The 30-N forces act parallel to the y-z plane.

30 N

60°
60

100 mm

x

mm

60°
40

mm y

25 N

50 mm

Solution. The couple due to the 30-N forces has the magnitude M1 ϭ 30(0.06) ϭ
1.80 N ⅐ m. The direction of M1 is normal to the plane deﬁned by the two forces,
and the sense, shown in the ﬁgure, is established by the right-hand convention.
The couple due to the 25-N forces has the magnitude M2 ϭ 25(0.10) ϭ 2.50 N ⅐ m
with the direction and sense shown in the same ﬁgure. The two couple vectors
combine to give the components

25 N
z
M2 = 2.5 N·m

My ϭ 1.80 sin 60Њ ϭ 1.559 N ⅐ m

M

Mz ϭ Ϫ2.50 ϩ 1.80 cos 60Њ ϭ Ϫ1.600 N ⅐ m

ᕡ Thus,

x

M ϭ Ί(1.559)2 ϩ (Ϫ1.600)2 ϭ 2.23 N ⅐ m
␪ ϭ tanϪ1 1.559 ϭ tanϪ1 0.974 ϭ 44.3Њ
1.600

with

Ans.
Ans.

The forces F and ϪF lie in a plane normal to the couple M, and their moment arm as seen from the right-hand ﬁgure is 100 mm. Thus, each force has the
magnitude
Fϭ

[M = Fd]

2.23
ϭ 22.3 N
0.10

Ans.

y
−F

θ

θ

y

F

60°
M1 = 1.8 N·m
z

z

Helpful Hint

ᕡ Bear in mind that the couple vectors
are free vectors and therefore have
no unique lines of action.

and the direction ␪ ϭ 44.3Њ.

SAMPLE PROBLEM 2/15

z

A force of 40 lb is applied at A to the handle of the control lever which is attached to the ﬁxed shaft OB. In determining the effect of the force on the shaft
at a cross section such as that at O, we may replace the force by an equivalent
force at O and a couple. Describe this couple as a vector M.

40 lb
8″
2″
3″

A
O

The couple may be expressed in vector notation as M ϭ r ؋ F,
where r ϭ OA ϭ 8j ϩ 5k in. and F ϭ Ϫ40i lb. Thus,

Solution.

θ

y

l

x

M ϭ (8j ϩ 5k) ؋ (Ϫ40i) ϭ Ϫ200j ϩ 320k lb-in.

z

Alternatively we see that moving the 40-lb force through a distance d ϭ
Ί52 ϩ 82 ϭ 9.43 in. to a parallel position through O requires the addition of a
couple M whose magnitude is
M ϭ Fd ϭ 40(9.43) ϭ 377 lb-in.

5
␪ ϭ tanϪ1 8 ϭ 32.0Њ

Ans.

(40 lb)

M
40 lb
θ

Ans.

The couple vector is perpendicular to the plane in which the force is shifted, and
its sense is that of the moment of the given force about O. The direction of M in
the y-z plane is given by

B

O
x

d
θ

A
5″

8″
y

Article 2/8

Problems

81

2/123 Determine the moment of force F about point O,
about point A, and about line OB.

PROBLEMS
Introductory Problems

z

2/121 The three forces act perpendicular to the rectangular plate as shown. Determine the moments M1 of
F1, M2 of F2, and M3 of F3, all about point O.

A

b

a

z
F
F2
c
F1

O
y

c

F3

O

x

B
x

b
y

Problem 2/123

Problem 2/121

2/124 The steel H-beam is being designed as a column to
support the two vertical forces shown. Replace
these forces by a single equivalent force along the
vertical centerline of the column and a couple M.

2/122 The weight of the printer is 80 lb with center of
gravity at point G. Determine the moment MO of
this weight about point O on the horizontal table
top. Find the magnitude of MO.

z
100 kips

z

150 kips

y

6″

O

6″

G
x

"
48

3″
A

y

" "
9 24
x

Problem 2/124
Problem 2/122

82

Chapter 2

Force Systems

2/125 A right-angle bracket is welded to the ﬂange of the
I-beam to support the 9000-lb force, applied parallel to the axis of the beam, and the 5000-lb force,
applied in the end plane of the beam. In analyzing
the capacity of the beam to withstand the applied
loads in the design stage, it is convenient to replace
the forces by an equivalent force at O and a corresponding couple M. Determine the x-, y-, and
z-components of M.

2/127 The two forces acting on the handles of the pipe
wrenches constitute a couple M. Express the couple as a vector.
150 N
250 mm
250 mm

y

150 mm

y

x
O
z

150 N
x
8″

6″

9000 lb
4″

Problem 2/127

2/128 The body is composed of slender bar which has a
mass ␳ per unit of length. Determine the moment
of the weight of the body about point O.

30°

4″

z

5000 lb
Problem 2/125

b

a

2/126 The turnbuckle is tightened until the tension in
cable AB is 1.2 kN. Calculate the magnitude of
the moment about point O of the force acting on
point A.

h
z
O
x

1.6 m
A

Problem 2/128

2m
O
y
x

y

1.5 m
0.8 m
B
Problem 2/126

Article 2/8
2/129 In opening a door which is equipped with a heavyduty return mechanism, a person exerts a force P
of magnitude 6 lb as shown. Force P and the normal n to the face of the door lie in a vertical plane.
Compute the moment of P about the z-axis.

Problems

83

2/131 The bent bar has a mass ␳ per unit of length. Determine the moment of the weight of the bar about
point O.
z

z
O

x

θ

b

y

a
Problem 2/131

40″
P
30°
n

y

2/132 A helicopter is shown here with certain threedimensional geometry given. During a ground test,
a 400-N aerodynamic force is applied to the tail
rotor at P as shown. Determine the moment of this
force about point O of the airframe.

x

z

20°
Problem 2/129

6m

2/130 A 50-lb force is applied to the control pedal as
shown. The force lies in a plane parallel to the x-z
plane and is perpendicular to BC. Determine the
moments of this force about point O and about the
shaft OA.

x
0.8 m
O

z
y

P

x

400 N
1.2 m

7″
A

O

y
Problem 2/132

6″
B

15°

8″
C

Problem 2/130

50 lb

84

Chapter 2

Force Systems

Representative Problems

z

2/133 A 300-N force is applied to the handle of the winch
as shown. The force lies in a plane which is parallel
to the y-z plane and is perpendicular to line AB of
the handle. Determine the moments of this force
about point O and about the x-axis.

1.2 lb
25″

40 mm
75 mm

z
B

20″

20″
G

y
25″

75 mm
A
1.2 lb

x
300 N
60°
y

40°

Problem 2/135

350 mm

2/136 A space shuttle orbiter is subjected to thrusts from
ﬁve of the engines of its reaction control system.
Four of the thrusts are shown in the ﬁgure; the
ﬁfth is an 850-N upward thrust at the right rear,
symmetric to the 850-N thrust shown on the left
rear. Compute the moment of these forces about
point G and show that the forces have the same
moment about all points.

O

x
Problem 2/133

2/134 The right-angle pipe OAB of Prob. 2/111 is shown
again here. Replace the 750-N tensile force which
the cable exerts on point B by a force–couple system at point O.

3.2 m
3.2 m

y

y

m
1.2

1700 N
G

1700 N

850 N

2m

1700 N
12 m
C

O

1.6 m

0.7 m
A
z

30°

x

x

z

18 m

0.8 m
Problem 2/136

B
Problem 2/134

2/135 Two 1.2-lb thrusters on the nonrotating satellite
are simultaneously ﬁred as shown. Compute the
moment associated with this couple and state
about which satellite axes rotations will begin to
occur.

2/137 The specialty wrench shown in the ﬁgure is designed for access to the hold-down bolt on certain
automobile distributors. For the conﬁguration
shown where the wrench lies in a vertical plane
and a horizontal 200-N force is applied at A perpendicular to the handle, calculate the moment MO
applied to the bolt at O. For what value of the distance d would the z-component of MO be zero?

Article 2/8

Problems

85

2/140 Replace the two forces which act on the 3-m cube by
an equivalent single force F at A and a couple M.

A
d = 125 mm

30 kN

20°

200 Ν

z

3m

y

200 mm

40 kN

A

z

3m

3m
O

Problem 2/140
y

x

x

70 mm
Problem 2/137

2/138 A 50-N horizontal force is applied to the handle of
the industrial water valve as shown. The force is
perpendicular to the vertical plane containing line
OA of the handle. Determine the equivalent force–
couple system at point O.

2/141 Using the principles to be developed in Chapter 3
on equilibrium, one can determine that the tension
in cable AB is 143.4 N. Determine the moment
about the x-axis of this tension force acting on
point A. Compare your result with the moment of
the weight W of the 15-kg uniform plate about the
x-axis. What is the moment of the tension force acting at A about line OB?
z

z

0.35 m
125 mm

A

B
20 mm

O

40°
y

O

50 N
0.4 m

x

20°
15 kg

G
x

0.7 m

0.45 m

Problem 2/138

A

2/139 If the magnitude of the moment of F about line CD
is 50 N ⅐ m, determine the magnitude of F.
B

F
0.2 m
C
0.2 m
A
0.2 m

D
0.4 m

Problem 2/139

W

Problem 2/141

y

86

Chapter 2

Force Systems

2/142 The rigid pole and cross-arm assembly of Prob.
2/107 is shown again here. Determine the vector
expression for the moment of the 1.2-kN tension
(a) about point O and (b) about the pole z-axis.
Find each moment in two different ways.

2/144 The special-purpose milling cutter is subjected to
the force of 1200 N and a couple of 240 N ⅐ m as
shown. Determine the moment of this system about
point O.
y

z′
z
B

C

m

1.5

O
y′

G

x′

1 m 1.5 m

x

A

z
T = 1.2 kN
3m

F
1m

2m

250 mm
200 mm

E

.5 m

O

1

240 N·m

3m

x

1200 N

D
y

60°
Problem 2/142
Problem 2/144

2/143 A 1.8-lb vertical force is applied to the knob of the
window-opener mechanism when the crank BC is
horizontal. Determine the moment of the force
about point A and about line AB.

2/145 The 180-lb force is applied at point A of the bracket.
Determine the moments of this force about point B,
about point C, and about the line BC.
6″
C

1″

B

1.8 lb
3″
y

z

D

13″

C

B

x

z

2″

A

y

180 lb

30°

60°
A

45°
x

15″
12″

Problem 2/143
Problem 2/145

Article 2/8
2/146 For the instant shown when the crankpins of a
two-cylinder engine pass through the horizontal yz plane, connecting rod A is under a compression of
1.8 kN and rod B is under a compression of 0.8 kN.
Determine the moment (torque) exerted by the two
rods about the crank axis z. For design purposes it
is also necessary to have the vector expression for
the moments of the two forces about one of the
main ball bearings at O.

Problems

᭤2/148 The threading die is screwed onto the end of the
ﬁxed pipe, which is bent through an angle of 20Њ.
Replace the two forces by an equivalent force at O
and a couple M. Find M and calculate the magnitude MЈ of the moment which tends to screw the
pipe into the ﬁxed block about its angled axis
through O.
y

6″
8″
20°
O

x

40 lb

30 lb
z
10″
230

x

230
10″
B

O

A
80

y

Problem 2/148
80

130

z

130
Dimensions in millimeters
Problem 2/146

2/147 The force F acts along an element of the right circular cone as shown. Determine the equivalent
force–couple system at point O.
z

F

O
θ

x

h
–
2
Problem 2/147

h

y

87

88

Chapter 2

Force Systems

2/9

Resultants

© josemoraes/iStockphoto

In Art. 2/6 we deﬁned the resultant as the simplest force combination which can replace a given system of forces without altering the external effect on the rigid body on which the forces act. We found the
magnitude and direction of the resultant force for the two-dimensional
force system by a vector summation of forces, Eq. 2/9, and we located the
line of action of the resultant force by applying the principle of moments,
Eq. 2/10. These same principles can be extended to three dimensions.
In the previous article we showed that a force could be moved to a
parallel position by adding a corresponding couple. Thus, for the system
of forces F1, F2, F3 . . . acting on a rigid body in Fig. 2/28a, we may move
each of them in turn to the arbitrary point O, provided we also introduce a couple for each force transferred. Thus, for example, we may
move force F1 to O, provided we introduce the couple M1 ϭ r1 ؋ F1,
where r1 is a vector from O to any point on the line of action of F1.
When all forces are shifted to O in this manner, we have a system of
concurrent forces at O and a system of couple vectors, as represented in
part b of the ﬁgure. The concurrent forces may then be added vectorially
to produce a resultant force R, and the couples may also be added to
produce a resultant couple M, Fig. 2/28c. The general force system,
then, is reduced to
The cables of this cable-stayed bridge
exert a three-dimensional system of
concentrated forces on the bridge
tower.

R ϭ F1 ϩ F2 ϩ F3 ϩ ⅐ ⅐ ⅐ ϭ ΣF

(2/20)

M ϭ M1 ϩ M2 ϩ M3 ϩ ⅐ ⅐ ⅐ ϭ Σ(r ؋ F)

The couple vectors are shown through point O, but because they are
free vectors, they may be represented in any parallel positions. The
magnitudes of the resultants and their components are
Rx ϭ ΣFx

Ry ϭ ΣFy

Rz ϭ ΣFz

R ϭ Ί(ΣFx)2 ϩ (ΣFy)2 ϩ (ΣFz)2
Mx ϭ Σ(r ؋ F)x

My ϭ Σ(r ؋ F)y

Mz ϭ Σ(r ؋ F)z

(2/21)

M ϭ ΊM2 ϩ M2 ϩ M2
x
y
z

M2
F1

M3
M

F1

M1

F2

R

F2

≡

O

≡

O

O

F3
F3
(a)

(b)

Figure 2/28

(c)

Article 2/9

The point O selected as the point of concurrency for the forces is arbitrary, and the magnitude and direction of M depend on the particular
point O selected. The magnitude and direction of R, however, are the
same no matter which point is selected.
In general, any system of forces may be replaced by its resultant
force R and the resultant couple M. In dynamics we usually select the
mass center as the reference point. The change in the linear motion of
the body is determined by the resultant force, and the change in the angular motion of the body is determined by the resultant couple. In statics, the body is in complete equilibrium when the resultant force R is
zero and the resultant couple M is also zero. Thus, the determination of
resultants is essential in both statics and dynamics.
We now examine the resultants for several special force systems.
Concurrent Forces. When forces are concurrent at a point, only the
ﬁrst of Eqs. 2/20 needs to be used because there are no moments about
the point of concurrency.
Parallel Forces. For a system of parallel forces not all in the same
plane, the magnitude of the parallel resultant force R is simply the magnitude of the algebraic sum of the given forces. The position of its line of
action is obtained from the principle of moments by requiring that
r ؋ R ϭ MO. Here r is a position vector extending from the force–couple
reference point O to the ﬁnal line of action of R, and MO is the sum of
the moments of the individual forces about O. See Sample Problem 2/17
for an example of parallel-force systems.
Coplanar Forces. Article 2/6 was devoted to this force system.
Wrench Resultant. When the resultant couple vector M is parallel
to the resultant force R, as shown in Fig. 2/29, the resultant is called a
wrench. By deﬁnition a wrench is positive if the couple and force vectors
point in the same direction and negative if they point in opposite directions. A common example of a positive wrench is found with the application of a screwdriver, to drive a right-handed screw. Any general force
system may be represented by a wrench applied along a unique line of
action. This reduction is illustrated in Fig. 2/30, where part a of the ﬁgure represents, for the general force system, the resultant force R acting
at some point O and the corresponding resultant couple M. Although M
is a free vector, for convenience we represent it as acting through O.
In part b of the ﬁgure, M is resolved into components M1 along the direction of R and M2 normal to R. In part c of the ﬁgure, the couple M2 is
replaced by its equivalent of two forces R and ϪR separated by a distance

M

R

M

Positive wrench

R

Negative wrench

Figure 2/29

Resultants

89

90

Chapter 2

Force Systems
M

M
M2
M1

R
O

O

(a)

(b)

M1

R
R

O

R

O

R

d

–R
M1
(c)

(d)

Figure 2/30

d ϭ M2/R with ϪR applied at O to cancel the original R. This step leaves
the resultant R, which acts along a new and unique line of action, and the
parallel couple M1, which is a free vector, as shown in part d of the ﬁgure.
Thus, the resultants of the original general force system have been transformed into a wrench (positive in this illustration) with its unique axis deﬁned by the new position of R.
We see from Fig. 2/30 that the axis of the wrench resultant lies in a
plane through O normal to the plane deﬁned by R and M. The wrench is
the simplest form in which the resultant of a general force system may
be expressed. This form of the resultant, however, has limited application, because it is usually more convenient to use as the reference point
some point O such as the mass center of the body or another convenient
origin of coordinates not on the wrench axis.

Article 2/9

SAMPLE PROBLEM 2/16

Resultants

z

Determine the resultant of the force and couple system which acts on the
rectangular solid.

700 lb-in.
50 lb

50 lb
960
lb-in.

R ϭ ΣF ϭ (80 Ϫ 80)i ϩ (100 Ϫ 100)j ϩ (50 Ϫ 50)k ϭ 0 lb

12″

O

The sum of the moments about O is

ᕢ

1000 lb-in.

80 lb

We choose point O as a convenient reference point for the initial
step of reducing the given forces to a force–couple system. The resultant force is

Solution.

ᕡ

91

80 lb

MO ϭ [50(16) Ϫ 700]i ϩ [80(12) Ϫ 960] j ϩ [100(10) Ϫ 1000]k lb-in.
ϭ 100i lb-in.

x

16″

10″ 100 lb

Hence, the resultant consists of a couple, which of course may be applied at any
point on the body or the body extended.

100 lb
y

Helpful Hints

ᕡ Since the force summation is zero, we conclude that the resultant, if it exists,
must be a couple.

ᕢ The moments associated with the force pairs are easily obtained by using the

M ϭ Fd rule and assigning the unit-vector direction by inspection. In many
three-dimensional problems, this may be simpler than the M ϭ r ؋ F approach.

SAMPLE PROBLEM 2/17

50 N

Determine the resultant of the system of parallel forces which act on the
plate. Solve with a vector approach.

0.5 m
z

x

Solution.

0.5 m

Transfer of all forces to point O results in the force–couple system
R ϭ ΣF ϭ (200 ϩ 500 Ϫ 300 Ϫ 50)j ϭ 350j N
MO ϭ [50(0.35) Ϫ 300(0.35)]i ϩ [Ϫ50(0.50) Ϫ 200(0.50)]k
ϭ Ϫ87.5i Ϫ 125k N ⅐ m

500 N

0.35 m

y

200 N
300 N

The placement of R so that it alone represents the above force–couple system is
determined by the principle of moments in vector form

z

r ؋ R ϭ MO

x

x

(xi ϩ yj ϩ zk) ؋ 350j ϭ Ϫ87.5i Ϫ 125k

z

350xk Ϫ 350zi ϭ Ϫ87.5i Ϫ 125k

and

Ϫ350z ϭ Ϫ87.5

Hence, x ϭ Ϫ0.357 m and z ϭ 0.250 m are the coordinates through which the
line of action of R must pass. The value of y may, of course, be any value, as
ᕡ permitted by the principle of transmissibility. Thus, as expected, the variable y
drops out of the above vector analysis.

r

R

From the one vector equation we may obtain the two scalar equations
350x ϭ Ϫ125

0.35 m

O

O

R

MO

y

Helpful Hint

ᕡ You should also carry out a scalar
solution to this problem.

92

Chapter 2

Force Systems

SAMPLE PROBLEM 2/18

x
700 N

Replace the two forces and the negative wrench by a single force R applied
at A and the corresponding couple M.

500 N
25 N· m

60°

40°
z B

Solution.

The resultant force has the components

[Rx ϭ ΣFx]
[Ry ϭ ΣFy]

Ry ϭ 600 ϩ 500 cos 40Њ cos 45Њ ϭ 871 N

[Rz ϭ ΣFz]

100
mm

Rx ϭ 500 sin 40Њ ϩ 700 sin 60Њ ϭ 928 N

Rz ϭ 700 cos 60Њ ϩ 500 cos 40Њ sin 45Њ ϭ 621 N

30
mm
A 50 mm
60 mm

80 mm
45°
600 N
40 mm

120 mm

y

R ϭ 928i ϩ 871j ϩ 621k N

Thus,

R

and

R ϭ Ί(928)2 ϩ (871)2 ϩ (621)2 ϭ 1416 N

Ans.

M

The couple to be added as a result of moving the 500-N force is

ᕡ [M ϭ r ؋ F] M500 ϭ (0.08i ϩ 0.12j ϩ 0.05k) ؋ 500(i sin 40Њ

A

ϩ j cos 40Њ cos 45Њ ϩ k cos 40Њ sin 45Њ)
where r is the vector from A to B.
The term-by-term, or determinant, expansion gives

Helpful Hints

ᕡ Suggestion: Check the cross-product

M500 ϭ 18.95i Ϫ 5.59j Ϫ 16.90k N ⅐ m

ᕢ The moment of the 600-N force about A is written by inspection of its x- and zcomponents, which gives

ᕢ For the 600-N and 700-N forces it is

M600 ϭ (600)(0.060)i ϩ (600)(0.040)k
ϭ 36.0i ϩ 24.0k N ⅐ m
The moment of the 700-N force about A is easily obtained from the moments of
the x- and z-components of the force. The result becomes
M700 ϭ (700 cos 60Њ)(0.030)i Ϫ [(700 sin 60Њ)(0.060)
ϭ ϩ (700 cos 60Њ)(0.100)] j Ϫ (700 sin 60Њ)(0.030)k

wrench points in the direction opposite to that of the 500-N force, and
we must resolve it into its x-, y-, and
z-components to be added to the
other couple-vector components.

ᕣ Also, the couple of the given wrench may be written
MЈ ϭ 25.0(Ϫi sin 40Њ Ϫ j cos 40Њ cos 45Њ Ϫ k cos 40Њ sin 45Њ)

ᕤ Although the resultant couple vec-

ϭ Ϫ16.07i Ϫ13.54 j Ϫ 13.54k N ⅐ m
Therefore, the resultant couple on adding together the i-, j-, and k-terms of the
four M’s is
M ϭ 49.4i Ϫ 90.5j Ϫ 24.6k N ⅐ m
and

M ϭ Ί(49.4)2 ϩ (90.5)2 ϩ (24.6)2 ϭ 106.0 N ⅐ m

easier to obtain the components of
their moments about the coordinate
directions through A by inspection
of the ﬁgure than it is to set up the
cross-product relations.

ᕣ The 25-N ⅐ m couple vector of the

ϭ 10.5i Ϫ 71.4 j Ϫ 18.19k N ⅐ m

ᕤ

results by evaluating the moments
about A of the components of the
500-N force directly from the sketch.

Ans.

tor M in the sketch of the resultants
is shown through A, we recognize
that a couple vector is a free vector
and therefore has no speciﬁed line
of action.

Article 2/9

SAMPLE PROBLEM 2/19

Resultants

93

z

Determine the wrench resultant of the three forces acting on the bracket.
Calculate the coordinates of the point P in the x-y plane through which the resultant force of the wrench acts. Also ﬁnd the magnitude of the couple M of the
wrench.

4″
3″
y

40 lb

y

The direction cosines of the couple M of the wrench must be the
ᕡ same as those of the resultant force R, assuming that the wrench is positive. The
resultant force is

Solution.

P
40 lb
x

R ϭ Ί(20)2 ϩ (40)2 ϩ (40)2 ϭ 60 lb

R ϭ 20i ϩ 40j ϩ 40k lb

5″

x

20 lb

z
4″

and its direction cosines are
cos ␪x ϭ 20/60 ϭ 1/3

cos ␪y ϭ 40/60 ϭ 2/3

cos ␪z ϭ 40/60 ϭ 2/3

y

3″
x=

The moment of the wrench couple must equal the sum of the moments of
the given forces about point P through which R passes. The moments about P of
the three forces are

3i

n.

P
5″

y = 2 in.

(M)Rx ϭ 20yk lb-in.
M

(M)Ry ϭ Ϫ40(3)i Ϫ 40xk lb-in.
(M)Rz ϭ 40(4 Ϫ y)i Ϫ 40(5 Ϫ x)j lb-in.

R

x

Helpful Hint

ᕡ We assume initially that the wrench

and the total moment is

is positive. If M turns out to be negative, then the direction of the couple vector is opposite to that of the
resultant force.

M ϭ (40 Ϫ 40y)i ϩ (Ϫ200 ϩ 40x)j ϩ (Ϫ40x ϩ 20y)k lb-in.
The direction cosines of M are
cos ␪x ϭ (40 Ϫ 40y)/M
cos ␪y ϭ (Ϫ200 ϩ 40x)/M
cos ␪z ϭ (Ϫ40x ϩ 20y)/M
where M is the magnitude of M. Equating the direction cosines of R and M gives
40 Ϫ 40y ϭ

M
3

Ϫ200 ϩ40x ϭ

2M
3

Ϫ40x ϩ20y ϭ

2M
3

Solution of the three equations gives
M ϭ Ϫ120 lb-in.

x ϭ 3 in.

y ϭ 2 in.

Ans.

We see that M turned out to be negative, which means that the couple vector is
pointing in the direction opposite to R, which makes the wrench negative.

94

Chapter 2

Force Systems

PROBLEMS
Introductory Problems
2/149 A baseball is thrown with spin so that three concurrent forces act on it as shown in the ﬁgure. The
weight W is 5 oz, the drag D is 1.7 oz, and the lift L
is perpendicular to the velocity v of the ball. If it is
known that the y-component of the resultant is
Ϫ5.5 oz and the z-component is Ϫ0.866 oz, determine L, ␪, and R.

2/151 Two forces act on the rectangular plate as shown.
Reduce this force system to an equivalent force–
couple system acting at point O. Then determine
the resultant of the system, expressed as a single
force if possible, with its line of action.
z

F

O
2b

b

y
x

y

x

v

2F
Problem 2/151

θ

L

2/152 The concrete slab supports the six vertical loads
shown. Determine the x- and y-coordinates of the
point on the slab through which the resultant of
the loading system passes.

z

D

W
Problem 2/149

40 kN
48 kN

2/150 A table exerts the four forces shown on the ﬂoor surface. Reduce the force system to a force–couple system at point O. Show that R is perpendicular to MO.

32 kN
64 kN

72 kN

56 kN
z

x

160 N

200 N

2.4

80 N

y

y

3.6

160 N
x

2.8
2.8

3.2
2

Dimensions in meters

0.6 m

0.9 m
O
Problem 2/150

Problem 2/152

Article 2/9
2/153 The thin rectangular plate is subjected to the
four forces shown. Determine the equivalent force–
couple system at O. Is R perpendicular to MO?
z

F

95

2/155 The spacecraft of Prob. 2/135 is repeated here. The
plan is to ﬁre four 1.2-lb thrusters as shown in
order to spin up the spacecraft about its z-axis, but
the thruster at A fails. Determine the equivalent
forced–couple system at G for the remaining three
thrusters.

F
O

Problems

z
b
1.2 lb

y

2b

1.2 lb
25″

F
20″

x

20″
G

y
25″

30°

F

x

A

1.2 lb

Problem 2/153

2/154 The pulley wheels are subjected to the loads shown.
Determine the equivalent force–couple system at
point O.

Problem 2/155

2/156 An oil tanker moves away from its docked position
under the action of reverse thrust from screw A,
forward thrust from screw B, and side thrust from
the bow thruster C. Determine the equivalent
forced–couple system at the mass center G.

y
600 N
240 400 N
mm

O

z
40 m

y
200 N
z

600

mm
600

300 N

mm
Problem 2/154

180
mm

x

C

G
7m
50 kN

A
50 kN

x
B

5m 5m

Problem 2/156

6m
8 kN

96

Chapter 2

Force Systems

2/157 Determine the force–couple system at O which is
equivalent to the two forces applied to the shaft
AOB. Is R perpendicular to MO?

y
A
600 N

2/159 The commercial airliner of Prob. 2/90 is redrawn
here with three-dimensional information supplied.
If engine 3 suddenly fails, determine the resultant
of the three remaining engine thrust vectors, each
of which has a magnitude of 90 kN. Specify the
y- and z-coordinates of the point through which the
line of action of the resultant passes. This information would be critical to the design criteria of performance with engine failure.

30°
O

80 mm

4

y
160 mm

z

B

2m

x

90 kN

45°

3
3m

2m

12 m
12 m

800 N

1

2

3m

9m

x

z
90 kN 90 kN
9m

Problem 2/157
Problem 2/159

Representative Problems
2/158 Replace the two forces and single couple by an
equivalent force–couple system at point A.
35 kN·m
1m

2/160 Two upward loads are exerted on the small threedimensional truss. Reduce these two loads to a single force–couple system at point O. Show that R is
perpendicular to MO. Then determine the point in
the x-z plane through which the resultant passes.

1m

y

20 kN
1m

1m

3′
y

40 kN

x

3′
A

3m
O
z
Problem 2/158

z

4′
4′

3′

400 lb
x

200 lb
Problem 2/160

Article 2/9
2/161 The horizontal top of a concrete column is subjected to the system of forces shown. Represent the
resultant of all forces as a force R at point O and a
couple M. Also specify the magnitudes of R and M.
z
4 kN
3 kN

x

0.8 m 2 kN

0.8 m

0.8 m
2 kN

O

97

2/163 In tightening a bolt whose center is at point O, a
person exerts a 40-lb force on the ratchet handle
with his right hand. In addition, with his left hand
he exerts a 20-lb force as shown in order to secure
the socket onto the bolt head. Determine the equivalent force–couple system at O. Then ﬁnd the point
in the x-y plane through which the line of action of
the resultant force of the wrench passes.
40 lb

0.4 m
5 kN

1 kN

Problems

3 kN

1.4″

8″

z

3 kN

y
m
0.4

O
x
20 lb

m
0.4

y
Problem 2/163

Problem 2/161

2/162 Replace the two forces and one couple acting on
the rigid pipe frame by their equivalent resultant
force R acting at point O and a couple MO.
50 lb

2/164 Replace the two forces acting on the pole by a
wrench. Write the moment M associated with the
wrench as a vector and specify the coordinates of
the point P in the y-z plane through which the line
of action of the wrench passes.

30°

z

10″

T

z
a
40 lb-ft
T

60 lb
15″

3a
O
O

12″
x

y
y
Problem 2/162

x
Problem 2/164

98

Chapter 2

Force Systems

2/165 Replace the two forces acting on the frame by a
wrench. Write the moment associated with the
wrench as a vector and specify the coordinates of
the point P in the y-z plane through which the line
of action of the wrench passes. Note that the force
of magnitude F is parallel to the x-axis.

᭤2/167 Replace the two forces acting on the rectangular
solid by a wrench. Write the moment M associated
with the wrench as a vector and specify the coordinates of the point P in the x-y plane through which
the line of action of the wrench passes.
z

z
3F

a
a

b

F
F
F

O

x

2a

y

Problem 2/167

O

x

c

y

Problem 2/165

2/166 For the system of two forces in Prob. 2/157, determine the coordinates of the point in the x-z plane
through which the line of action of the resultant of
the system passes.

᭤2/168 Replace the system of two forces and couple shown
in Prob. 2/158 by a wrench. Determine the magnitude of the moment M of the wrench, the magnitude of the force R of the wrench, and the
coordinates of the point P in the x-y plane through
which R passes.

Article 2/10

2/10

Chapter Review

In Chapter 2 we have established the properties of forces, moments,
and couples, and the correct procedures for representing their effects.
Mastery of this material is essential for our study of equilibrium in the
chapters which follow. Failure to correctly use the procedures of Chapter 2 is a common cause of errors in applying the principles of equilibrium. When difﬁculties arise, you should refer to this chapter to be sure
that the forces, moments, and couples are correctly represented.

Forces
There is frequent need to represent forces as vectors, to resolve a
single force into components along desired directions, and to combine
two or more concurrent forces into an equivalent resultant force. Specifically, you should be able to:
1. Resolve a given force vector into its components along given directions, and express the vector in terms of the unit vectors along a
given set of axes.
2. Express a force as a vector when given its magnitude and information about its line of action. This information may be in the form of
two points along the line of action or angles which orient the line of
action.
3. Use the dot product to compute the projection of a vector onto a
speciﬁed line and the angle between two vectors.
4. Compute the resultant of two or more forces concurrent at a point.

Moments
The tendency of a force to rotate a body about an axis is described
by a moment (or torque), which is a vector quantity. We have seen that
ﬁnding the moment of a force is often facilitated by combining the moments of the components of the force. When working with moment vectors you should be able to:
1. Determine a moment by using the moment-arm rule.
2. Use the vector cross product to compute a moment vector in terms
of a force vector and a position vector locating the line of action of
the force.
3. Utilize Varignon’s theorem to simplify the calculation of moments,
in both scalar and vector forms.
4. Use the triple scalar product to compute the moment of a force vector about a given axis through a given point.

Couples
A couple is the combined moment of two equal, opposite, and noncollinear forces. The unique effect of a couple is to produce a pure twist
or rotation regardless of where the forces are located. The couple is
useful in replacing a force acting at a point by a force–couple system at

Chapter Review

99

100

Chapter 2

Force Systems

a different point. To solve problems involving couples you should be
able to:
1. Compute the moment of a couple, given the couple forces and either
their separation distance or any position vectors locating their lines
of action.
2. Replace a given force by an equivalent force–couple system, and vice
versa.

Resultants
We can reduce an arbitrary system of forces and couples to a single
resultant force applied at an arbitrary point, and a corresponding resultant couple. We can further combine this resultant force and couple into
a wrench to give a single resultant force along a unique line of action,
together with a parallel couple vector. To solve problems involving resultants you should be able to:
1. Compute the magnitude, direction, and line of action of the resultant of a system of coplanar forces if that resultant is a force; otherwise, compute the moment of the resultant couple.
2. Apply the principle of moments to simplify the calculation of the
moment of a system of coplanar forces about a given point.
3. Replace a given general force system by a wrench along a speciﬁc
line of action.

Equilibrium
You will use the preceding concepts and methods when you study
equilibrium in the following chapters. Let us summarize the concept of
equilibrium:
1. When the resultant force on a body is zero (ΣF ϭ 0), the body is in
translational equilibrium. This means that its center of mass is either at rest or moving in a straight line with constant velocity.
2. In addition, if the resultant couple is zero (ΣM ϭ 0), the body is in
rotational equilibrium, either having no rotational motion or rotating with a constant angular velocity.
3. When both resultants are zero, the body is in complete equilibrium.

Article 2/10

REVIEW PROBLEMS
2/169 A cable stretched between the ﬁxed supports A and B
is under a tension T of 2 kN. Express the tension as a
vector using the unit vectors i and j, ﬁrst, as a force
TA acting on A and second, as a force TB acting on B.

Review Problems

101

2/171 The three forces act perpendicular to the rectangular plate as shown. Determine the moments M1 of
F1, M2 of F2, and M3 of F3, all about point O.
z
F1

600 mm
A
c
F2
y

O

400 mm

y

a
x

F3

x
B
Problem 2/169

2/170 It is known that the y-component of the force F
exerted on pin P is 20 lb when ␪ ϭ 30Њ and
␤ ϭ 15Њ. Determine the force magnitude F and the
x-component of F.
y

Problem 2/171

2/172 A die is being used to cut threads on a rod. If 15-lb
forces are applied as shown, determine the magnitude F of the equal forces exerted on the 1 -in. rod
4
by each of the four cutting surfaces so that their
external effect on the rod is equivalent to that of
the two 15-lb forces.
1
—″
4

F

t
β

n

θ

O

P
x
15 lb
15 lb
5″

Problem 2/170

5″

Problem 2/172

102

Chapter 2

Force Systems

2/173 The control lever is subjected to a clockwise couple
of 80 N ⅐ m exerted by its shaft at A and is designed
to operate with a 200-N pull as shown. If the resultant of the couple and the force passes through A,
determine the proper dimension x of the lever.

100 N

600 mm
A

600 mm

200 N
160 N
150 mm

600 mm
x
240 N
20°

Problem 2/175
A

2/176 Reduce the given loading system to a force–couple
system at point A. Then determine the distance x
to the right of point A at which the resultant of the
three forces acts.

Problem 2/173

2/174 Calculate the moment MO of the 250-N force about
the base point O of the robot.

200 lb

8″

20°

18″

C
60°

20″

A

400 mm
A

180 lb

250 N
300 lb

B

500 mm

Problem 2/176
300 mm

2/177 Represent the resultant of the three forces and
couple by a force–couple system located at point A.

O

Problem 2/174

2/175 Replace the three forces shown by an equivalent
force–couple system at point A. If the forces are
replaced by a single resultant force, determine the
distance d below point A to its line of action.

3 kN
1.5 m

3.5 m

2.5 m
A

10 kN·m
160°

2m

5 kN
4 kN
Problem 2/177

Article 2/10
2/178 Express and identify the resultant of the two forces
and one couple shown acting on the shaft angled in
the x-z plane.

Review Problems

103

2/180 A force F acts along the line AB inside the right
circular cylindrical shell as shown. The quantities
r, h, ␪, and F are known. Using the x-, y-, and
z-coordinates shown, express F as a vector.

x
y

O

A

y

h

A
300 lb 6″

O

z
18″

F

400 lb-ft

θ

z

r

B

x

300 lb
20°
Problem 2/180

Problem 2/178

2/179 When the pole OA is in the position shown, the tension in cable AB is 3 kN. (a) Write the tension force
exerted on the small collar at point A as a vector
using the coordinates shown. (b) Determine the
moment of this force about point O and state the moments about the x-, y-, and z-axes. (c) Determine the
projection of this tension force onto line AO.

2/181 The spring which connects point B of the disk and
point C on the vertical surface is under a tension of
500 N. Write this tension as it acts on point B as a
force vector T in terms of the unit vectors i, j, and
k, and determine the moment Mz of this force
about the shaft axis OA.
y
350 mm

C

300 mm
z
OA = 10 m
OB = 8 m
OG = 6 m

A
x
G
y
O
B

60

B

600 mm
O

30°
A

150 mm

35
z
x
Problem 2/181

Problem 2/179

104

Chapter 2

Force Systems

2/182 Three couples are formed by the three pairs of
equal and opposite forces. Determine the resultant
M of the three couples.

y
2 kN

1
m 80
m

30°
100 N

80 N

100 N

x

0
10
mm

20°

30°
30°

20°

0
20
mm

T

x

y

θ

80 N
45°

120 N

1.2 kN

120 N

45°

1.8 kN
z

Problem 2/184

Problem 2/182

2/183 The combined action of the three forces on the
base at O may be obtained by establishing their
resultant through O. Determine the magnitudes of
R and the accompanying couple M.
z

400 lb

* 2/185 The throttle-control lever OA rotates in the range
0 Յ ␪ Յ 90Њ. An internal torsional return spring
exerts a restoring moment about O given by
M ϭ K(␪ ϩ ␲ /4), where K ϭ 500 N ⅐ mm /rad and ␪
is in radians. Determine and plot as a function of
␪ the tension T required to make the net moment
about O zero. Use the two values d ϭ 60 mm and
d ϭ 160 mm and comment on the relative design
merits. The effects of the radius of the pulley at B
are negligible.

3′
θ

3′

A

B

3′
7′

40 mm

45°

O

600 lb

40 mm
T

M

y 45°
O
x

500 lb

d
Problem 2/185

Problem 2/183

*Computer-Oriented Problems
* 2/184 The eyebolt supports the four forces shown. If the
net effect on the bolt is a direct pull of 3 kN in the
x-direction, determine the necessary values of ␪
and T.

* 2/186 The ﬁgure of Prob. 2/78 is repeated here. The force
of magnitude F acts along line MA, where M is the
midpoint of the radius along the x-axis. Determine
and plot the moment MO of the force about the origin O as a function of ␪ over the range 0 Յ ␪ Յ 90Њ.
State the maximum value of MO and the corresponding value of ␪.

Article 2/10

y

Review Problems

105

Vertical
F

A

A
11″
θ

O

θ

x

M

130°
B
8 lb
C
13″

R
––
2

R
––
2
Problem 2/188

Problem 2/186

* 2/187 A motor attached to the shaft at O causes the arm
OA to rotate over the range 0 Յ ␪ Յ 180Њ. The unstretched length of the spring is 0.65 m, and it can
support both tension and compression. If the net
moment about O must be zero, determine and plot
the required motor torque M as a function of ␪.

* 2/189 The tension T in cable AB is maintained at a constant
value of 120 N. Determine the moment MO of this
tension about point O over the range 0 Յ ␪ Յ 90Њ.
Plot the x-, y-, and z-components of MO as functions
of ␪.
T
B

y

y
M

A

0.5 m

400 mm
θ

A′′
O

A′

x

800 mm
x

k = 600 N/m
0.3 m
A

O
B
θ

Problem 2/187
800 mm

* 2/188 A person locks his elbow so that the angle ABC is
maintained at 130Њ and rotates the shoulder joint
at A so that the arm remains in the vertical plane
shown. The shoulder joint remains ﬁxed. Determine and plot on the same axes the moments about
points A and B of the weight of the 8-lb sphere
as the angle ␪ is varied from 0 to 120Њ. Comment on
the physical signiﬁcance of the maximum value of
the moment on each curve.

A′
z

Problem 2/189

106

Chapter 2

Force Systems

* 2/190 Assume that the hydraulic cylinder AB exerts a
force F of constant magnitude 500 lb as the bin is
elevated. Determine and plot the moment of this
force about the point O for the range 0 Յ ␪ Յ 90Њ.
At what angle ␪ is this moment a maximum and
what is the maximum moment?

* 2/192 The arm AB rotates in the range 0 Յ ␪ Յ 180Њ, and
the spring is unstretched when ␪ ϭ 90Њ. Determine
as a function of ␪ the moment about O of the spring
force as applied at B. Plot the three scalar components of MO, and state the maximum absolute value
of each component.
z

1.2′
A
B –––
OB = 6′

θ

O
A

B

2′
2.4′
k = 15 lb/in.

2′
Problem 2/190
x

* 2/191 As part of the design process for a larger mechanism, the portion shown in the ﬁgure is considered.
The spring of modulus k ϭ 200 N /m is attached to
the ﬁxed point O and to the slider A which moves
along the slot. The unstretched length of the
spring is 150 mm, and the force in the spring is the
constant k times the deﬂection of the spring. Plot
the x-, y-, and z-components of the spring force as
applied to A as the slider moves in the range
Ϫ200 Յ x Յ 200 mm.
200 mm
200 mm
A

k = 200 N/m
150 mm
O
y

100 mm
z
Problem 2/191

x

O
θ

1.2′

D
y
Problem 2/192

This page intentionally left blank

In many applications of mechanics, the sum of the forces acting on a body is zero, and a state of equilibrium exists. As this boat is slowly lifted by several cables, the sum of the vertical components of the
cable forces is equal and opposite to the weight of the boat. The horizontal components of the cable
forces are also balanced.
© gaspr13/iStockphoto

3

Equilibrium
CHAPTER OUTLINE
3/1 Introduction

Section B Equilibrium in Three Dimensions

Section A Equilibrium in Two Dimensions

3/4 Equilibrium Conditions

3/2 System Isolation and the Free-Body Diagram

3/5 Chapter Review

3/3 Equilibrium Conditions

3/1

Introduction

Statics deals primarily with the description of the force conditions
necessary and sufficient to maintain the equilibrium of engineering
structures. This chapter on equilibrium, therefore, constitutes the
most important part of statics, and the procedures developed here form
the basis for solving problems in both statics and dynamics. We will
make continual use of the concepts developed in Chapter 2 involving
forces, moments, couples, and resultants as we apply the principles of
equilibrium.
When a body is in equilibrium, the resultant of all forces acting on
it is zero. Thus, the resultant force R and the resultant couple M are
both zero, and we have the equilibrium equations
R ϭ ΣF ϭ 0

M ϭ ΣM ϭ 0

(3/1)

These requirements are both necessary and sufﬁcient conditions for
equilibrium.
All physical bodies are three-dimensional, but we can treat many of
them as two-dimensional when the forces to which they are subjected
act in a single plane or can be projected onto a single plane. When this
simpliﬁcation is not possible, the problem must be treated as threedimensional. We will follow the arrangement used in Chapter 2, and discuss in Section A the equilibrium of bodies subjected to two-dimensional

109

110

Chapter 3

Equilibrium

force systems and in Section B the equilibrium of bodies subjected to
three-dimensional force systems.

SECTION A EQUILIBRIUM IN TWO DIMENSIONS
3/2

System Isolation and the Free-Body Diagram

Before we apply Eqs. 3/1, we must deﬁne unambiguously the particular body or mechanical system to be analyzed and represent clearly
and completely all forces acting on the body. Omission of a force which
acts on the body in question, or inclusion of a force which does not act
on the body, will give erroneous results.
A mechanical system is deﬁned as a body or group of bodies which
can be conceptually isolated from all other bodies. A system may be a
single body or a combination of connected bodies. The bodies may be
rigid or nonrigid. The system may also be an identiﬁable ﬂuid mass, either liquid or gas, or a combination of ﬂuids and solids. In statics we
study primarily forces which act on rigid bodies at rest, although we also
study forces acting on ﬂuids in equilibrium.
Once we decide which body or combination of bodies to analyze, we
then treat this body or combination as a single body isolated from all
surrounding bodies. This isolation is accomplished by means of the
free-body diagram, which is a diagrammatic representation of the
isolated system treated as a single body. The diagram shows all forces
applied to the system by mechanical contact with other bodies, which
are imagined to be removed. If appreciable body forces are present,
such as gravitational or magnetic attraction, then these forces must
also be shown on the free-body diagram of the isolated system. Only
after such a diagram has been carefully drawn should the equilibrium
equations be written. Because of its critical importance, we emphasize
here that
the free-body diagram is the most important single
step in the solution of problems in mechanics.
Before attempting to draw a free-body diagram, we must recall the
basic characteristics of force. These characteristics were described in
Art. 2/2, with primary attention focused on the vector properties of
force. Forces can be applied either by direct physical contact or by remote action. Forces can be either internal or external to the system
under consideration. Application of force is accompanied by reactive
force, and both applied and reactive forces may be either concentrated
or distributed. The principle of transmissibility permits the treatment
of force as a sliding vector as far as its external effects on a rigid body
are concerned.
We will now use these force characteristics to develop conceptual
models of isolated mechanical systems. These models enable us to

Article 3/2

System Isolation and the Free-Body Diagram

write the appropriate equations of equilibrium, which can then be
analyzed.

Modeling the Action of Forces
Figure 3/1 shows the common types of force application on mechanical systems for analysis in two dimensions. Each example shows the
force exerted on the body to be isolated, by the body to be removed. Newton’s third law, which notes the existence of an equal and opposite reaction to every action, must be carefully observed. The force exerted on
the body in question by a contacting or supporting member is always in
the sense to oppose the movement of the isolated body which would
occur if the contacting or supporting body were removed.

MODELING THE ACTION OF FORCES IN TWO-DIMENSIONAL ANALYSIS
Type of Contact and Force Origin
Action on Body to Be Isolated
1. Flexible cable, belt,
chain, or rope
Weight of cable
negligible
Weight of cable
not negligible

θ

Force exerted by
a flexible cable is
always a tension away
from the body in the
direction of the cable.

θ
T

θ

θ
T

2. Smooth surfaces
Contact force is
compressive and is
normal to the surface.

N

Rough surfaces are
capable of supporting
a tangential component F (frictional
force) as well as a
normal component
N of the resultant
contact force R.

3. Rough surfaces
F
R
N

4. Roller support
Roller, rocker, or ball
support transmits a
compressive force
normal to the
supporting surface.

N

N
5. Freely sliding guide

N

Figure 3/1

N

Collar or slider free to
move along smooth
guides; can support
force normal to guide
only.

111

112

Chapter 3

Equilibrium

MODELING THE ACTION OF FORCES IN TWO-DIMENSIONAL ANALYSIS (cont.)
Type of Contact and Force Origin
Action on Body to Be Isolated
A freely hinged pin
connection is capable
θ
of supporting a force
in any direction in the
Rx
plane normal to the
R
pin axis. We may
Ry
either show two
Pin not free to turn components Rx and
Ry or a magnitude R
and direction θ. A pin
not free to turn also
Rx
M
supports a couple M.
Ry

6. Pin connection

Pin free to turn

7. Built-in or fixed support
A

A built-in or fixed
support is capable of
supporting an axial
force F, a transverse
force V (shear force),
and a couple M
(bending moment) to
prevent rotation.

A
M

A
or

F
Weld
V

8. Gravitational attraction
m

G

W = mg

9. Spring action
Neutral
position

Nonlinear

Linear
F

F

F = kx

x

Hardening

F

F
x

Softening
x

The resultant of
gravitational
attraction on all
elements of a body of
mass m is the weight
W = mg and acts
toward the center of
the earth through the
center mass G.
Spring force is tensile
if spring is stretched
and compressive if
compressed. For a
linearly elastic spring
the stiffness k is the
force required to
deform the spring a
unit distance.

Figure 3/1, continued
In Fig. 3/1, Example 1 depicts the action of a ﬂexible cable, belt, rope,
or chain on the body to which it is attached. Because of its ﬂexibility, a
rope or cable is unable to offer any resistance to bending, shear, or compression and therefore exerts only a tension force in a direction tangent to
the cable at its point of attachment. The force exerted by the cable on the
body to which it is attached is always away from the body. When the tension T is large compared with the weight of the cable, we may assume that
the cable forms a straight line. When the cable weight is not negligible
compared with its tension, the sag of the cable becomes important, and
the tension in the cable changes direction and magnitude along its length.
When the smooth surfaces of two bodies are in contact, as in Example 2, the force exerted by one on the other is normal to the tangent to
the surfaces and is compressive. Although no actual surfaces are per-

System Isolation and the Free-Body Diagram

fectly smooth, we can assume this to be so for practical purposes in
many instances.
When mating surfaces of contacting bodies are rough, as in Example 3, the force of contact is not necessarily normal to the tangent to the
surfaces, but may be resolved into a tangential or frictional component F
and a normal component N.
Example 4 illustrates a number of forms of mechanical support
which effectively eliminate tangential friction forces. In these cases the
net reaction is normal to the supporting surface.
Example 5 shows the action of a smooth guide on the body it supports. There cannot be any resistance parallel to the guide.
Example 6 illustrates the action of a pin connection. Such a connection can support force in any direction normal to the axis of the pin. We
usually represent this action in terms of two rectangular components.
The correct sense of these components in a speciﬁc problem depends on
how the member is loaded. When not otherwise initially known, the
sense is arbitrarily assigned and the equilibrium equations are then
written. If the solution of these equations yields a positive algebraic sign
for the force component, the assigned sense is correct. A negative sign
indicates the sense is opposite to that initially assigned.
If the joint is free to turn about the pin, the connection can support
only the force R. If the joint is not free to turn, the connection can also
support a resisting couple M. The sense of M is arbitrarily shown here,
but the true sense depends on how the member is loaded.
Example 7 shows the resultants of the rather complex distribution
of force over the cross section of a slender bar or beam at a built-in or
ﬁxed support. The sense of the reactions F and V and the bending couple M in a given problem depends, of course, on how the member is
loaded.
One of the most common forces is that due to gravitational attraction, Example 8. This force affects all elements of mass in a body and is,
therefore, distributed throughout it. The resultant of the gravitational
forces on all elements is the weight W ϭ mg of the body, which passes
through the center of mass G and is directed toward the center of the
earth for earthbound structures. The location of G is frequently obvious
from the geometry of the body, particularly where there is symmetry.
When the location is not readily apparent, it must be determined by experiment or calculations.
Similar remarks apply to the remote action of magnetic and electric
forces. These forces of remote action have the same overall effect on a
rigid body as forces of equal magnitude and direction applied by direct
external contact.
Example 9 illustrates the action of a linear elastic spring and of a
nonlinear spring with either hardening or softening characteristics. The
force exerted by a linear spring, in tension or compression, is given by
F ϭ kx, where k is the stiffness of the spring and x is its deformation
measured from the neutral or undeformed position.
The representations in Fig. 3/1 are not free-body diagrams, but are
merely elements used to construct free-body diagrams. Study these nine
conditions and identify them in the problem work so that you can draw
the correct free-body diagrams.

113

© Peter Bialobrzeski/Laif/Redux

Article 3/2

This apparatus is designed to hold
a car body in equilibrium for a wide
range of orientations during vehicle
production.

114

Chapter 3

Equilibrium

KEY CONCEPTS
Construction of Free-Body Diagrams
The full procedure for drawing a free-body diagram which isolates a
body or system consists of the following steps.

Step 1. Decide which system to isolate. The system chosen should
usually involve one or more of the desired unknown quantities.
Step 2. Next isolate the chosen system by drawing a diagram which
represents its complete external boundary. This boundary deﬁnes the
isolation of the system from all other attracting or contacting bodies,
which are considered removed. This step is often the most crucial of all.
Make certain that you have completely isolated the system before proceeding with the next step.
Step 3. Identify all forces which act on the isolated system as applied by the removed contacting and attracting bodies, and represent
them in their proper positions on the diagram of the isolated system.
Make a systematic traverse of the entire boundary to identify all contact
forces. Include body forces such as weights, where appreciable. Represent all known forces by vector arrows, each with its proper magnitude,
direction, and sense indicated. Each unknown force should be represented by a vector arrow with the unknown magnitude or direction indicated by symbol. If the sense of the vector is also unknown, you must
arbitrarily assign a sense. The subsequent calculations with the equilibrium equations will yield a positive quantity if the correct sense was assumed and a negative quantity if the incorrect sense was assumed. It is
necessary to be consistent with the assigned characteristics of unknown
forces throughout all of the calculations. If you are consistent, the solution of the equilibrium equations will reveal the correct senses.
Step 4. Show the choice of coordinate axes directly on the diagram.
Pertinent dimensions may also be represented for convenience. Note,
however, that the free-body diagram serves the purpose of focusing attention on the action of the external forces, and therefore the diagram
should not be cluttered with excessive extraneous information. Clearly
distinguish force arrows from arrows representing quantities other than
forces. For this purpose a colored pencil may be used.

Completion of the foregoing four steps will produce a correct freebody diagram to use in applying the governing equations, both in statics
and in dynamics. Be careful not to omit from the free-body diagram certain forces which may not appear at ﬁrst glance to be needed in the calculations. It is only through complete isolation and a systematic
representation of all external forces that a reliable accounting of the effects of all applied and reactive forces can be made. Very often a force
which at ﬁrst glance may not appear to inﬂuence a desired result does
indeed have an inﬂuence. Thus, the only safe procedure is to include on
the free-body diagram all forces whose magnitudes are not obviously
negligible.

Article 3/2

System Isolation and the Free-Body Diagram

The free-body method is extremely important in mechanics because
it ensures an accurate deﬁnition of a mechanical system and focuses attention on the exact meaning and application of the force laws of statics
and dynamics. Review the foregoing four steps for constructing a freebody diagram while studying the sample free-body diagrams shown in
Fig. 3/2 and the Sample Problems which appear at the end of the next
article.

Examples of Free-Body Diagrams
Figure 3/2 gives four examples of mechanisms and structures together with their correct free-body diagrams. Dimensions and magnitudes are omitted for clarity. In each case we treat the entire system as

SAMPLE FREE-BODY DIAGRAMS
Mechanical System

Free-Body Diagram of Isolated Body

1. Plane truss
Weight of truss
assumed negligible
compared with P

P
P

A

B

y

Ax

x
Ay

2. Cantilever beam
F3

F2

V

F1

By
F3

F2

F
Mass m

A

F1

y
M
W = mg
x

3. Beam
M

Smooth surface
contact at A.
Mass m

M
N

A
P

P
B

Bx

y

W = mg

x

By
4. Rigid system of interconnected bodies
analyzed as a single unit
Weight of mechanism
neglected

P

y
P
x

m
A

W = mg

B

Bx
Ay

Figure 3/2

By

115

116

Chapter 3

Equilibrium

a single body, so that the internal forces are not shown. The characteristics of the various types of contact forces illustrated in Fig. 3/1 are used
in the four examples as they apply.
In Example 1 the truss is composed of structural elements which,
taken all together, constitute a rigid framework. Thus, we may remove
the entire truss from its supporting foundation and treat it as a single
rigid body. In addition to the applied external load P, the free-body diagram must include the reactions on the truss at A and B. The rocker at
B can support a vertical force only, and this force is transmitted to the
structure at B (Example 4 of Fig. 3/1). The pin connection at A (Example 6 of Fig. 3/1) is capable of supplying both a horizontal and a vertical
force component to the truss. If the total weight of the truss members is
appreciable compared with P and the forces at A and B, then the
weights of the members must be included on the free-body diagram as
external forces.
In this relatively simple example it is clear that the vertical component Ay must be directed down to prevent the truss from rotating clockwise about B. Also, the horizontal component Ax will be to the left to
keep the truss from moving to the right under the inﬂuence of the horizontal component of P. Thus, in constructing the free-body diagram for
this simple truss, we can easily perceive the correct sense of each of the
components of force exerted on the truss by the foundation at A and can,
therefore, represent its correct physical sense on the diagram. When the
correct physical sense of a force or its component is not easily recognized by direct observation, it must be assigned arbitrarily, and the correctness of or error in the assignment is determined by the algebraic
sign of its calculated value.
In Example 2 the cantilever beam is secured to the wall and subjected to three applied loads. When we isolate that part of the beam to
the right of the section at A, we must include the reactive forces applied
to the beam by the wall. The resultants of these reactive forces are
shown acting on the section of the beam (Example 7 of Fig. 3/1). A vertical force V to counteract the excess of downward applied force is shown,
and a tension F to balance the excess of applied force to the right must
also be included. Then, to prevent the beam from rotating about A, a
counterclockwise couple M is also required. The weight mg of the beam
must be represented through the mass center (Example 8 of Fig. 3/1).
In the free-body diagram of Example 2, we have represented the
somewhat complex system of forces which actually act on the cut section
of the beam by the equivalent force–couple system in which the force is
broken down into its vertical component V (shear force) and its horizontal component F (tensile force). The couple M is the bending moment in
the beam. The free-body diagram is now complete and shows the beam
in equilibrium under the action of six forces and one couple.
In Example 3 the weight W ϭ mg is shown acting through the center of mass of the beam, whose location is assumed known (Example 8 of
Fig. 3/1). The force exerted by the corner A on the beam is normal to the
smooth surface of the beam (Example 2 of Fig. 3/1). To perceive this action more clearly, visualize an enlargement of the contact point A,
which would appear somewhat rounded, and consider the force exerted
by this rounded corner on the straight surface of the beam, which is as-

System Isolation and the Free-Body Diagram

sumed to be smooth. If the contacting surfaces at the corner were not
smooth, a tangential frictional component of force could exist. In addition to the applied force P and couple M, there is the pin connection at
B, which exerts both an x- and a y-component of force on the beam. The
positive senses of these components are assigned arbitrarily.
In Example 4 the free-body diagram of the entire isolated mechanism contains three unknown forces if the loads mg and P are known.
Any one of many internal conﬁgurations for securing the cable leading
from the mass m would be possible without affecting the external response of the mechanism as a whole, and this fact is brought out by the
free-body diagram. This hypothetical example is used to show that the
forces internal to a rigid assembly of members do not inﬂuence the values of the external reactions.
We use the free-body diagram in writing the equilibrium equations,
which are discussed in the next article. When these equations are
solved, some of the calculated force magnitudes may be zero. This would
indicate that the assumed force does not exist. In Example 1 of Fig. 3/2,
any of the reactions Ax, Ay, or By can be zero for speciﬁc values of the
truss geometry and of the magnitude, direction, and sense of the applied
load P. A zero reaction force is often difﬁcult to identify by inspection,
but can be determined by solving the equilibrium equations.
Similar comments apply to calculated force magnitudes which are
negative. Such a result indicates that the actual sense is the opposite of
the assumed sense. The assumed positive senses of Bx and By in Example 3 and By in Example 4 are shown on the free-body diagrams. The
correctness of these assumptions is proved or disproved according to
whether the algebraic signs of the computed forces are plus or minus
when the calculations are carried out in an actual problem.
The isolation of the mechanical system under consideration is a crucial step in the formulation of the mathematical model. The most important aspect to the correct construction of the all-important free-body
diagram is the clear-cut and unambiguous decision as to what is included and what is excluded. This decision becomes unambiguous only
when the boundary of the free-body diagram represents a complete traverse of the body or system of bodies to be isolated, starting at some arbitrary point on the boundary and returning to that same point. The
system within this closed boundary is the isolated free body, and all contact forces and all body forces transmitted to the system across the
boundary must be accounted for.
The following exercises provide practice with drawing free-body diagrams. This practice is helpful before using such diagrams in the application of the principles of force equilibrium in the next article.

117

© xyno/iStockphoto

Article 3/2

Complex pulley systems are easily
handled with a systematic equilibrium analysis.

118

Chapter 3

Equilibrium

FREE-BODY DIAGRAM EXERCISES
3/A In each of the ﬁve following examples, the body to be
isolated is shown in the left-hand diagram, and an incomplete free-body diagram (FBD) of the isolated
body is shown on the right. Add whatever forces are

necessary in each case to form a complete free-body
diagram. The weights of the bodies are negligible unless otherwise indicated. Dimensions and numerical
values are omitted for simplicity.

Body
1. Bell crank
supporting mass
m with pin support
at A.

Incomplete FBD

Flexible
cable A

mg

T

m

A
Pull P

2. Control lever
applying torque
to shaft at O.

P

O
FO
A

3. Boom OA, of
negligible mass
compared with
mass m. Boom
hinged at O and
supported by
hoisting cable at B.

4. Uniform crate of
mass m leaning
against smooth
vertical wall and
supported on a
rough horizontal
surface.

5. Loaded bracket
supported by pin
connection at A and
fixed pin in smooth
slot at B.

B
m

mg

T

O

O

A

A

mg

B

B

B

B
A

Load L

Problem 3/A

L
A

Free-Body Diagram Exercises
3/B In each of the ﬁve following examples, the body to be
isolated is shown in the left-hand diagram, and either
a wrong or an incomplete free-body diagram (FBD) is
shown on the right. Make whatever changes or addi-

tions are necessary in each case to form a correct and
complete free-body diagram. The weights of the bodies are negligible unless otherwise indicated. Dimensions and numerical values are omitted for simplicity.

Body

Wrong or Incomplete FBD
P
P

1. Lawn roller of
mass m being
pushed up
incline .

mg
N
P

2. Prybar lifting
body A having
smooth horizontal
surface. Bar rests
on horizontal
rough surface.

P

R

A
N

3. Uniform pole of
mass m being
hoisted into position by winch.
Horizontal supporting surface
notched to prevent
slipping of pole.

T
mg
Notch

R
F
B

4. Supporting angle
bracket for frame;
pin joints.

B
A
A
F

5. Bent rod welded to
support at A and
subjected to two
forces and couple.

119

F

A
Ay

y

M

M
x P

Problem 3/B

P

120

Chapter 3

Equilibrium

3/C Draw a complete and correct free-body diagram of each
of the bodies designated in the statements. The weights
of the bodies are signiﬁcant only if the mass is stated.

1. Uniform horizontal bar of mass m
suspended by vertical cable at A and
supported by rough inclined surface
at B.

All forces, known and unknown, should be labeled.
(Note: The sense of some reaction components cannot
always be determined without numerical calculation.)

5. Uniform grooved wheel of mass m
supported by a rough surface and by
action of horizontal cable.

m
m

A

B

2. Wheel of mass m on verge of being
rolled over curb by pull P.

6. Bar, initially horizontal but deflected
under load L. Pinned to rigid support
at each end.
A

P

B
L

3. Loaded truss supported by pin joint at
A and by cable at B.

7. Uniform heavy plate of mass m
supported in vertical plane by cable
C and hinge A.
C

B

A

A

m

L
4. Uniform bar of mass m and roller of
mass m0 taken together. Subjected to
couple M and supported as shown.
Roller is free to turn.
M
m0

8. Entire frame, pulleys, and contacting
cable to be isolated as a single unit.
B

m
A

A

L

Problem 3/C

Article 3/3

3/3

Equilibrium Conditions

In Art. 3/1 we deﬁned equilibrium as the condition in which the resultant of all forces and moments acting on a body is zero. Stated in another way, a body is in equilibrium if all forces and moments applied to
it are in balance. These requirements are contained in the vector equations of equilibrium, Eqs. 3/1, which in two dimensions may be written
in scalar form as
ΣFx ϭ 0

ΣFy ϭ 0

ΣMO ϭ 0

(3/2)

The third equation represents the zero sum of the moments of all forces
about any point O on or off the body. Equations 3/2 are the necessary
and sufﬁcient conditions for complete equilibrium in two dimensions.
They are necessary conditions because, if they are not satisﬁed, there can
be no force or moment balance. They are sufﬁcient because once they are
satisﬁed, there can be no imbalance, and equilibrium is assured.
The equations relating force and acceleration for rigid-body motion
are developed in Vol. 2 Dynamics from Newton’s second law of motion.
These equations show that the acceleration of the mass center of a body
is proportional to the resultant force ΣF acting on the body. Consequently, if a body moves with constant velocity (zero acceleration), the
resultant force on it must be zero, and the body may be treated as in a
state of translational equilibrium.
For complete equilibrium in two dimensions, all three of Eqs. 3/2
must hold. However, these conditions are independent requirements,
and one may hold without another. Take, for example, a body which
slides along a horizontal surface with increasing velocity under the action of applied forces. The force–equilibrium equations will be satisﬁed in
the vertical direction where the acceleration is zero, but not in the horizontal direction. Also, a body, such as a ﬂywheel, which rotates about its
ﬁxed mass center with increasing angular speed is not in rotational equilibrium, but the two force–equilibrium equations will be satisﬁed.

Categories of Equilibrium
Applications of Eqs. 3/2 fall naturally into a number of categories
which are easily identiﬁed. The categories of force systems acting on
bodies in two-dimensional equilibrium are summarized in Fig. 3/3 and
are explained further as follows.
Category 1, equilibrium of collinear forces, clearly requires only
the one force equation in the direction of the forces (x-direction), since
all other equations are automatically satisﬁed.
Category 2, equilibrium of forces which lie in a plane (x-y plane)
and are concurrent at a point O, requires the two force equations only,
since the moment sum about O, that is, about a z-axis through O, is necessarily zero. Included in this category is the case of the equilibrium of a
particle.
Category 3, equilibrium of parallel forces in a plane, requires the
one force equation in the direction of the forces (x-direction) and one moment equation about an axis (z-axis) normal to the plane of the forces.

Equilibrium Conditions

121

122

Chapter 3

Equilibrium

CATEGORIES OF EQUILIBRIUM IN TWO DIMENSIONS
Force System

Free-Body Diagram

1. Collinear

Independent Equations
x

F3

Σ Fx = 0

F2
F1

2. Concurrent
at a point

y
F1

Σ Fx = 0

F2
x

O
F4

Σ Fy = 0

F3
y

3. Parallel

Σ Fx = 0

F2
F3

Σ Mz = 0

Σ Fx = 0

F1

Σ Mz = 0

x
F4

4. General

F2

F1

F3

M

Σ Fy = 0

y

F4

x

Figure 3/3

Category 4, equilibrium of a general system of forces in a plane
(x-y), requires the two force equations in the plane and one moment
equation about an axis (z-axis) normal to the plane.

P
P

–P

–P
Two-force members

Figure 3/4

Two- and Three-Force Members
You should be alert to two frequently occurring equilibrium situations. The first situation is the equilibrium of a body under the action
of two forces only. Two examples are shown in Fig. 3/4, and we see
that for such a two-force member to be in equilibrium, the forces must
be equal, opposite, and collinear. The shape of the member does not affect this simple requirement. In the illustrations cited, we consider the
weights of the members to be negligible compared with the applied
forces.
The second situation is a three-force member, which is a body under
the action of three forces, Fig. 3/5a. We see that equilibrium requires
the lines of action of the three forces to be concurrent. If they were not
concurrent, then one of the forces would exert a resultant moment
about the point of intersection of the other two, which would violate the
requirement of zero moment about every point. The only exception occurs when the three forces are parallel. In this case we may consider the
point of concurrency to be at inﬁnity.

Article 3/3

Equilibrium Conditions

The principle of the concurrency of three forces in equilibrium is of
considerable use in carrying out a graphical solution of the force equations. In this case the polygon of forces is drawn and made to close, as
shown in Fig. 3/5b. Frequently, a body in equilibrium under the action
of more than three forces may be reduced to a three-force member by a
combination of two or more of the known forces.

Alternative Equilibrium Equations
In addition to Eqs. 3/2, there are two other ways to express the general conditions for the equilibrium of forces in two dimensions. The ﬁrst
way is illustrated in Fig. 3/6, parts (a) and (b). For the body shown in
Fig. 3/6a, if ΣMA ϭ 0, then the resultant, if it still exists, cannot be a
couple, but must be a force R passing through A. If now the equation
ΣFx ϭ 0 holds, where the x-direction is arbitrary, it follows from Fig.
3/6b that the resultant force R, if it still exists, not only must pass
through A, but also must be perpendicular to the x-direction as shown.
Now, if ΣMB ϭ 0, where B is any point such that the line AB is not perpendicular to the x-direction, we see that R must be zero, and thus the
body is in equilibrium. Therefore, an alternative set of equilibrium
equations is
ΣFx ϭ 0

ΣMA ϭ 0

ΣMB ϭ 0

where the two points A and B must not lie on a line perpendicular to the
x-direction.
A third formulation of the equilibrium conditions may be made for
a coplanar force system. This is illustrated in Fig. 3/6, parts (c) and
(d). Again, if ΣMA ϭ 0 for any body such as that shown in Fig. 3/6c, the
resultant, if any, must be a force R through A. In addition, if ΣMB ϭ 0,
the resultant, if one still exists, must pass through B as shown in Fig.
3/6d. Such a force cannot exist, however, if ΣMC ϭ 0, where C is not
ΣMA = 0⎫
⎬ satisfied
Σ Fx = 0 ⎭

Σ MA = 0 satisfied
R

R

B

x

A

A

(a)

(b)
ΣMA = 0⎫
⎬ satisfied
Σ MB = 0⎭

Σ MA = 0 satisfied
R

R
B

A

A

C

(c)

(d)

Figure 3/6

F1

O
F2

F3
(a) Three-force member
F3
F1
F2
(b) Closed polygon
satisfies ΣF = 0

Figure 3/5

123

124

Chapter 3

Equilibrium

collinear with A and B. Thus, we may write the equations of equilibrium as

ΣMA ϭ 0

ΣMB ϭ 0

ΣMC ϭ 0

where A, B, and C are any three points not on the same straight line.
When equilibrium equations are written which are not independent, redundant information is obtained, and a correct solution of the
equations will yield 0 ϭ 0. For example, for a general problem in two dimensions with three unknowns, three moment equations written about
three points which lie on the same straight line are not independent.
Such equations will contain duplicated information, and solution of two
of them can at best determine two of the unknowns, with the third
equation merely verifying the identity 0 ϭ 0.

Constraints and Statical Determinacy
The equilibrium equations developed in this article are both necessary and sufﬁcient conditions to establish the equilibrium of a body.
However, they do not necessarily provide all the information required to
calculate all the unknown forces which may act on a body in equilibrium. Whether the equations are adequate to determine all the unknowns depends on the characteristics of the constraints against
possible movement of the body provided by its supports. By constraint
we mean the restriction of movement.
In Example 4 of Fig. 3/1 the roller, ball, and rocker provide constraint normal to the surface of contact, but none tangent to the surface. Thus, a tangential force cannot be supported. For the collar and
slider of Example 5, constraint exists only normal to the guide. In Example 6 the ﬁxed-pin connection provides constraint in both directions,
but offers no resistance to rotation about the pin unless the pin is not
free to turn. The ﬁxed support of Example 7, however, offers constraint
against rotation as well as lateral movement.
If the rocker which supports the truss of Example 1 in Fig. 3/2 were
replaced by a pin joint, as at A, there would be one additional constraint
beyond those required to support an equilibrium conﬁguration with no
freedom of movement. The three scalar conditions of equilibrium, Eqs.
3/2, would not provide sufﬁcient information to determine all four unknowns, since Ax and Bx could not be solved for separately; only their
sum could be determined. These two components of force would be dependent on the deformation of the members of the truss as inﬂuenced
by their corresponding stiffness properties. The horizontal reactions Ax
and Bx would also depend on any initial deformation required to ﬁt the
dimensions of the structure to those of the foundation between A and B.
Thus, we cannot determine Ax and Bx by a rigid-body analysis.
Again referring to Fig. 3/2, we see that if the pin B in Example 3
were not free to turn, the support could transmit a couple to the beam
through the pin. Therefore, there would be four unknown supporting reactions acting on the beam—namely, the force at A, the two components
of force at B, and the couple at B. Consequently the three independent

Article 3/3

scalar equations of equilibrium would not provide enough information to
compute all four unknowns.
A rigid body, or rigid combination of elements treated as a single
body, which possesses more external supports or constraints than are
necessary to maintain an equilibrium position is called statically indeterminate. Supports which can be removed without destroying the equilibrium condition of the body are said to be redundant. The number of
redundant supporting elements present corresponds to the degree of statical indeterminacy and equals the total number of unknown external
forces, minus the number of available independent equations of equilibrium. On the other hand, bodies which are supported by the minimum
number of constraints necessary to ensure an equilibrium conﬁguration
are called statically determinate, and for such bodies the equilibrium
equations are sufﬁcient to determine the unknown external forces.
The problems on equilibrium in this article and throughout Vol. 1
Statics are generally restricted to statically determinate bodies where
the constraints are just sufﬁcient to ensure a stable equilibrium conﬁguration and where the unknown supporting forces can be completely determined by the available independent equations of equilibrium.
We must be aware of the nature of the constraints before we attempt
to solve an equilibrium problem. A body can be recognized as statically
indeterminate when there are more unknown external reactions than
there are available independent equilibrium equations for the force system involved. It is always well to count the number of unknown variables
on a given body and to be certain that an equal number of independent
equations can be written; otherwise, effort might be wasted in attempting an impossible solution with the aid of the equilibrium equations only.
The unknown variables may be forces, couples, distances, or angles.

Adequacy of Constraints
In discussing the relationship between constraints and equilibrium,
we should look further at the question of the adequacy of constraints.
The existence of three constraints for a two-dimensional problem does
not always guarantee a stable equilibrium conﬁguration. Figure 3/7
shows four different types of constraints. In part a of the ﬁgure, point A
of the rigid body is ﬁxed by the two links and cannot move, and the third
link prevents any rotation about A. Thus, this body is completely ﬁxed
with three adequate (proper) constraints.
In part b of the ﬁgure, the third link is positioned so that the force
transmitted by it passes through point A where the other two constraint
forces act. Thus, this conﬁguration of constraints can offer no initial resistance to rotation about A, which would occur when external loads
were applied to the body. We conclude, therefore, that this body is incompletely ﬁxed under partial constraints.
The conﬁguration in part c of the ﬁgure gives us a similar condition
of incomplete ﬁxity because the three parallel links could offer no initial
resistance to a small vertical movement of the body as a result of external loads applied to it in this direction. The constraints in these two examples are often termed improper.

Equilibrium Conditions

A

(a) Complete fixity
Adequate constraints

A

(b) Incomplete fixity
Partial constraints

(c) Incomplete fixity
Partial constraints

4
A

(d) Excessive fixity
Redundant constraint

Figure 3/7

125

126

Chapter 3

Equilibrium

In part d of Fig. 3/7 we have a condition of complete ﬁxity, with link
4 acting as a fourth constraint which is unnecessary to maintain a ﬁxed
position. Link 4, then, is a redundant constraint, and the body is statically indeterminate.
As in the four examples of Fig. 3/7, it is generally possible by direct
observation to conclude whether the constraints on a body in twodimensional equilibrium are adequate (proper), partial (improper), or
redundant. As indicated previously, the vast majority of problems in this
book are statically determinate with adequate (proper) constraints.

KEY CONCEPTS
Approach to Solving Problems
The sample problems at the end of this article illustrate the application
of free-body diagrams and the equations of equilibrium to typical statics
problems. These solutions should be studied thoroughly. In the problem
work of this chapter and throughout mechanics, it is important to develop a logical and systematic approach which includes the following
steps:
1. Identify clearly the quantities which are known and unknown.
2. Make an unambiguous choice of the body (or system of connected
bodies treated as a single body) to be isolated and draw its complete
free-body diagram, labeling all external known and unknown but
identiﬁable forces and couples which act on it.
3. Choose a convenient set of reference axes, always using righthanded axes when vector cross products are employed. Choose moment centers with a view to simplifying the calculations. Generally
the best choice is one through which as many unknown forces pass
as possible. Simultaneous solutions of equilibrium equations are
frequently necessary, but can be minimized or avoided by a careful
choice of reference axes and moment centers.
4. Identify and state the applicable force and moment principles or
equations which govern the equilibrium conditions of the problem.
In the following sample problems these relations are shown in
brackets and precede each major calculation.
5. Match the number of independent equations with the number of
unknowns in each problem.
6. Carry out the solution and check the results. In many problems engineering judgment can be developed by ﬁrst making a reasonable
guess or estimate of the result prior to the calculation and then
comparing the estimate with the calculated value.

Article 3/3

Equilibrium Conditions

SAMPLE PROBLEM 3/1

127

y

Determine the magnitudes of the forces C and T, which, along with the
other three forces shown, act on the bridge-truss joint.

C
3 kN

x′

20°

Solution. The given sketch constitutes the free-body diagram of the isolated

ᕡ section of the joint in question and shows the ﬁve forces which are in equilibrium.

y′
T

Solution 1 (scalar algebra).

For the x-y axes as shown we have

40°

16 kN

[ΣFx ϭ 0]

0.766T ϩ 0.342C ϭ 8

Helpful Hints

0.643T Ϫ 0.940C ϭ 3

(b)

C ϭ 3.03 kN

Ans.

Solution II (scalar algebra). To avoid a simultaneous solution, we may use axes

ᕢ xЈ-yЈ with the ﬁrst summation in the yЈ-direction to eliminate reference to T. Thus,
ϪC cos 20Њ Ϫ 3 cos 40Њ Ϫ 8 sin 40Њ ϩ 16 sin 40Њ ϭ 0
C ϭ 3.03 kN
[ΣFxЈ ϭ 0]

ᕡ Since this is a problem of concurrent forces, no moment equation is
necessary.

Simultaneous solution of Eqs. (a) and (b) produces
T ϭ 9.09 kN

x

(a)

T sin 40Њ Ϫ C cos 20Њ Ϫ 3 ϭ 0

[ΣFy ϭ 0]

[ΣFyЈ ϭ 0]

8 kN

8 ϩ T cos 40Њ ϩ C sin 20Њ Ϫ 16 ϭ 0

Ans.

ᕢ The selection of reference axes to facilitate computation is always an important consideration. Alternatively
in this example we could take a set
of axes along and normal to the direction of C and employ a force summation normal to C to eliminate it.

T ϩ 8 cos 40Њ Ϫ 16 cos 40Њ Ϫ 3 sin 40Њ Ϫ 3.03 sin 20Њ ϭ 0
T ϭ 9.09 kN

Ans.

Solution III (vector algebra). With unit vectors i and j in the x- and y-directions, the zero summation of forces for equilibrium yields the vector equation
[ΣF ϭ 0]

8i ϩ (T cos 40Њ)i ϩ (T sin 40Њ)j Ϫ 3j ϩ (C sin 20Њ)i
Ϫ (C cos 20Њ)j Ϫ 16i ϭ 0

Equating the coefﬁcients of the i- and j-terms to zero gives
8 ϩ T cos 40Њ ϩ C sin 20Њ Ϫ 16 ϭ 0
T sin 40Њ Ϫ 3 Ϫ C cos 20Њ ϭ 0
which are the same, of course, as Eqs. (a) and (b), which we solved above.
The polygon representing the zero vector sum of
the ﬁve forces is shown. Equations (a) and (b) are seen immediately to give the
projections of the vectors onto the x- and y-directions. Similarly, projections onto
the xЈ- and yЈ-directions give the alternative equations in Solution II.
A graphical solution is easily obtained. The known vectors are laid off headᕣ to-tail to some convenient scale, and the directions of T and C are then drawn to
close the polygon. The resulting intersection at point P completes the solution,
thus enabling us to measure the magnitudes of T and C directly from the drawing to whatever degree of accuracy we incorporate in the construction.

Solution IV (geometric).

P

T

C

20°
8 kN
3 kN

40°
16 kN

ᕣ The known vectors may be added in
any order desired, but they must be
added before the unknown vectors.

128

Chapter 3

Equilibrium

SAMPLE PROBLEM 3/2

T
θ = 30°

Calculate the tension T in the cable which supports the 1000-lb load with
the pulley arrangement shown. Each pulley is free to rotate about its bearing,
and the weights of all parts are small compared with the load. Find the magnitude of the total force on the bearing of pulley C.

C

B

The free-body diagram of each pulley is drawn in its relative position to the others. We begin with pulley A, which includes the only known force.
With the unspeciﬁed pulley radius designated by r, the equilibrium of moments
about its center O and the equilibrium of forces in the vertical direction require

Solution.

ᕡ [ΣMO ϭ 0]

T1r Ϫ T2r ϭ 0

[ΣFy ϭ 0]

A
1000 lb

T1 ϭ T2

T1 ϩ T2 Ϫ 1000 ϭ 0

2T1 ϭ 1000

T

T1 ϭ T2 ϭ 500 lb

Fx

From the example of pulley A we may write the equilibrium of forces on pulley B
by inspection as

T
3

Fy

T3 ϭ T4 ϭ T2/2 ϭ 250 lb

T ϭ 250 lb

or

T
4
B y

For pulley C the angle ␪ ϭ 30Њ in no way affects the moment of T about the center of the pulley, so that moment equilibrium requires
T ϭ T3

30°

C

T
2

T
1

Ans.

x

O

A

Equilibrium of the pulley in the x- and y-directions requires
1000 lb

[ΣFx ϭ 0]

250 cos 30Њ Ϫ Fx ϭ 0

Fx ϭ 217 lb

[ΣFy ϭ 0]

Fy ϩ 250 sin 30Њ Ϫ 250 ϭ 0

Fy ϭ 125 lb

[F ϭ ΊFx2 ϩ Fy2]

F ϭ Ί(217)2 ϩ (125)2 ϭ 250 lb

Helpful Hint
Ans.

ᕡ Clearly the radius r does not inﬂuence
the results. Once we have analyzed a
simple pulley, the results should be
perfectly clear by inspection.

SAMPLE PROBLEM 3/3
The uniform 100-kg I-beam is supported initially by its end rollers on the
horizontal surface at A and B. By means of the cable at C it is desired to elevate
end B to a position 3 m above end A. Determine the required tension P, the reaction at A, and the angle ␪ made by the beam with the horizontal in the elevated
position.

P

6m

C

2m

A

In constructing the free-body diagram, we note that the reaction on
the roller at A and the weight are vertical forces. Consequently, in the absence of
other horizontal forces, P must also be vertical. From Sample Problem 3/2 we
see immediately that the tension P in the cable equals the tension P applied to
the beam at C.
Moment equilibrium about A eliminates force R and gives

B

Solution.

ᕡ [ΣMA ϭ 0]

P(6 cos ␪) Ϫ 981(4 cos ␪) ϭ 0

P ϭ 654 N

Ans.

Equilibrium of vertical forces requires
[ΣFy ϭ 0]

654 ϩ R Ϫ 981 ϭ 0

R ϭ 327 N

Ans.

␪ ϭ 22.0Њ

2m

y

B

2m C

3m

4m

θ

A

100(9.81) N

x

R

Helpful Hint

The angle ␪ depends only on the speciﬁed geometry and is
sin ␪ ϭ 3/8

P

Ans.

ᕡ Clearly the equilibrium of this parallel force system is independent of ␪.

Article 3/3

Equilibrium Conditions

129

SAMPLE PROBLEM 3/4
Determine the magnitude T of the tension in the supporting cable and the
magnitude of the force on the pin at A for the jib crane shown. The beam AB is a
standard 0.5-m I-beam with a mass of 95 kg per meter of length.
0.25 m
25°

A

Algebraic solution. The system is symmetrical about the vertical x-y plane
through the center of the beam, so the problem may be analyzed as the equilibrium of a coplanar force system. The free-body diagram of the beam is shown in
the ﬁgure with the pin reaction at A represented in terms of its two rectangular
components. The weight of the beam is 95(10Ϫ3)(5)9.81 ϭ 4.66 kN and acts
through its center. Note that there are three unknowns Ax, Ay, and T, which may
be found from the three equations of equilibrium. We begin with a moment
equation about A, which eliminates two of the three unknowns from the equaᕡ tion. In applying the moment equation about A, it is simpler to consider the moments of the x- and y-components of T than it is to compute the perpendicular
distance from T to A. Hence, with the counterclockwise sense as positive we
write

ᕢ [ΣMA ϭ 0]

T ϭ 19.61 kN

Ans.

10 kN
5m
y

T
25°

Ax

x
Ay

4.66 kN

Ax Ϫ 19.61 cos 25Њ ϭ 0
Ay ϩ 19.61 sin 25Њ Ϫ 4.66 Ϫ 10 ϭ 0

Ay ϭ 6.37 kN

ᕣ [A ϭ ΊAx2 ϩ Ay2]

A ϭ Ί(17.77)2 ϩ (6.37)2 ϭ 18.88 kN

ᕢ The calculation of moments in twoAns.

The principle that three forces in equilibrium must be
concurrent is utilized for a graphical solution by combining the two known vertical forces of 4.66 and 10 kN into a single 14.66-kN force, located as shown on the
modiﬁed free-body diagram of the beam in the lower ﬁgure. The position of this
resultant load may easily be determined graphically or algebraically. The intersection of the 14.66-kN force with the line of action of the unknown tension T
deﬁnes the point of concurrency O through which the pin reaction A must pass.
The unknown magnitudes of T and A may now be found by adding the forces
head-to-tail to form the closed equilibrium polygon of forces, thus satisfying
their zero vector sum. After the known vertical load is laid off to a convenient
scale, as shown in the lower part of the ﬁgure, a line representing the given direction of the tension T is drawn through the tip of the 14.66-kN vector. Likewise a line representing the direction of the pin reaction A, determined from the
concurrency established with the free-body diagram, is drawn through the tail of
the 14.66-kN vector. The intersection of the lines representing vectors T and A
establishes the magnitudes T and A necessary to make the vector sum of the
forces equal to zero. These magnitudes are scaled from the diagram. The x- and
y-components of A may be constructed on the force polygon if desired.

Graphical solution.

Helpful Hints
Varignon’s theorem, explained in
Art. 2/4. Be prepared to take full advantage of this principle frequently.

Ax ϭ 17.77 kN

[ΣFy ϭ 0]

10 kN
Free-body diagram

ᕡ The justiﬁcation for this step is

Equating the sums of forces in the x- and y-directions to zero gives
[ΣFx ϭ 0]

1.5 m

0.12 m

(T cos 25Њ)0.25 ϩ (T sin 25Њ)(5 Ϫ 0.12)
Ϫ 10(5 Ϫ 1.5 Ϫ 0.12) Ϫ 4.66(2.5 Ϫ 0.12) ϭ 0

from which

B

0.5 m

dimensional problems is generally
handled more simply by scalar algebra than by the vector cross product
r ؋ F. In three dimensions, as we will
see later, the reverse is often the case.

ᕣ The direction of the force at A could
be easily calculated if desired. However, in designing the pin A or in
checking its strength, it is only the
magnitude of the force that matters.
O
25°

Ax
A

Ay

4.66 kN

10 kN
14.66 kN

8

8.8

1
A=

T=

T

kN

14.66 kN

19.6

1 kN

Graphical solution

130

Chapter 3

Equilibrium
3/4 The uniform beam has a mass of 50 kg per meter of
length. Determine the reactions at the supports.

PROBLEMS
Introductory Problems

y

3/1 The 50-kg homogeneous smooth sphere rests on the
30Њ incline A and bears against the smooth vertical
wall B. Calculate the contact forces at A and B.

1.2 m

2.4 m

300 kg
A

B
30°

B

Problem 3/4

A

3/5 The 500-kg uniform beam is subjected to the three
external loads shown. Compute the reactions at the
support point O. The x-y plane is vertical.

Problem 3/1

3/2 A carpenter holds a 12-lb 2-in. by 4-in. board as shown.
If he exerts vertical forces on the board, determine
the forces at A and B.

y

30°

15 kN·m
O

A

3 kN

B

x

C
1.4 kN
B

1.2 m

A

1.8 m

1.8 m

Problem 3/5
2′

6′

3/6 Calculate the force and moment reactions at the bolted
base O of the overhead trafﬁc-signal assembly. Each
trafﬁc signal has a mass of 36 kg, while the masses of
members OC and AC are 50 kg and 55 kg, respectively.
The mass center of member AC is at G.

Problem 3/2

3/3 The weight of the bicycle is 29 lb with center of gravity at G. Determine the normal forces at A and B
when the bicycle is in equilibrium.

A

B
G
36 kg

55 kg

C

36 kg
5m

1
m

4m
7m

G
50 kg
O
A

B
18.5″

22.5″
Problem 3/6

Problem 3/3

Article 3/3
3/7 A former student of mechanics wishes to weigh himself but has access only to a scale A with capacity limited to 100 lb and a small 20-lb spring dynamometer
B. With the rig shown he discovers that when he exerts a pull on the rope so that B registers 19 lb, the
scale A reads 67 lb. What is his correct weight?

3/9

Problems

131

When the 0.05-kg body is in the position shown, the
linear spring is stretched 10 mm. Determine the
force P required to break contact at C. Complete solutions for (a) including the effects of the weight
and (b) neglecting the weight.

60 mm

P

60 mm

A

O
40 mm
B

B

k = 1750 N/m
40 mm
C
Problem 3/9

A

Problem 3/7

3/8 A 120-lb crate rests on the 60-lb pickup tailgate. Calculate the tension T in each of the two restraining cables, one of which is shown. The centers of gravity
are at G1 and G2. The crate is located midway between the two cables.

60 mm

P

60 mm

kq O

A

80 mm

14′′

B

12′′

G2
A

3/10 When the 0.05-kg body is in the position shown, the
torsional spring at O is pretensioned so as to exert a
0.75-N ⅐ m clockwise moment on the body. Determine the force P required to break contact at C.
Complete solutions for (a) including the effect of the
weight and (b) neglecting the weight.

O
G1

9.5′′
2.75′′
Problem 3/8

C

Problem 3/10

132

Chapter 3

Equilibrium

3/11 When on level ground, the car is placed on four individual scales—one under each tire. The scale readings are 4450 N at each front wheel and 2950 N at
each rear wheel. Determine the x-coordinate of the
mass center G and the mass of the car.

3/13 Three cables are joined at the junction ring C. Determine the tensions in cables AC and BC caused by
the weight of the 30-kg cylinder.
A

y
45°
A

B

D
C

15°

760 mm
G

x

O

760 mm
30 kg

30°
D

C
2640 mm

B

Problem 3/11
Problem 3/13

3/12 Determine the force magnitude P required to lift
one end of the 250-kg crate with the lever dolly as
shown. State any assumptions.

P

3/14 A woodcutter wishes to cause the tree trunk to fall
uphill, even though the trunk is leaning downhill.
With the aid of the winch W, what tension T in the
cable will be required? The 1200-lb trunk has a center of gravity at G. The felling notch at O is sufﬁciently large so that the resisting moment there is
negligible.

250 kg

5°

1500 mm
14′
A
275 mm

B

A
4′

G

10°

Horizontal
W
B

12′
Problem 3/12

O

Problem 3/14

Article 3/3
3/15 Find the angle of tilt ␪ with the horizontal so that
the contact force at B will be one-half that at A for
the smooth cylinder.

Problems

133

3/17 The “deadman” lever controls the augers of a snow
thrower. If a force F = 30 N is required to begin rotating the lever about the ideal pivot at O, determine the corresponding tension T in the control
cable AB and the magnitude of the pin reaction
at O. Neglect the weight of the lever.
F

0
15
m
m

B
A
45°

45°

θ

A
O
Problem 3/15
B

3/16 A bicyclist applies a 40-N force to the brake lever of
her bicycle as shown. Determine the corresponding
tension T transmitted to the brake cable. Neglect
friction at the pivot O.

T

50
m
m

T

Problem 3/17

mm
22

3/18 The right-angle uniform slender bar AOB has mass
m. If friction at the pivot O is neglected, determine
the magnitude of the normal force at A and the
magnitude of the pin reaction at O.

A
O
88 mm

40 N

A

30°
2L/3
B

m

Problem 3/16

L/3
O

Problem 3/18

134

Chapter 3

Equilibrium

3/19 Determine the minimum cylinder mass m1 required
to cause loss of contact at A.
A

3/21 Determine the magnitude P of the vertical force required to lift the wheelbarrow free of the ground at
point B. The combined weight of the wheelbarrow
and its load is 240 lb with center of gravity at G.
P

30°
A

2L/3

G

24″

20″

B
m
B

L/3
O

19″

C
21″

8″

Problem 3/21

m1

3/22 The force P on the handle of the positioning lever
produces a vertical compression of 60 lb in the
coiled spring in the position shown. Determine
the corresponding force exerted by the pin at O on
the lever.

Problem 3/19
P

3/20 A 700-N axial force is required to remove the pulley
from its shaft. What force F must be exerted on the
handle of each of the two prybars? Friction at the
contact points B and E is sufﬁcient to prevent slipping; friction at the pulley contact points C and F is
negligible.

8"

38 31
mm mm
B

C O

F

O

A

E

3.20"
250 mm

F

F
A

D
5°

Problem 3/20

Problem 3/22

Article 3/3

Problems

135

Representative Problems
3/23 A pipe P is being bent by the pipe bender as shown.
If the hydraulic cylinder applies a force of magnitude F ϭ 24 kN to the pipe at C, determine the magnitude of the roller reactions at A and B.
A

A

225 N

B
C

15°

1500 mm

20°

P

B

200 mm

F

C

Problem 3/25

Problem 3/23

3/24 Cable AB passes over the small ideal pulley C without a change in its tension. What length of cable CD
is required for static equilibrium in the position
shown? What is the tension T in cable CD?

A

3/26 The elements of a heavy-duty ﬂuid valve are shown
in the ﬁgure. When the member OB rotates clockwise about the ﬁxed pivot O under the action of the
force P, the element S slides freely upward in its
slot, releasing the ﬂow. If an internal torsional
spring exerts a moment M ϭ 20 N ⅐ m as shown, determine the force P required to open the valve. Neglect all friction.

D

45°

2′

180 mm

B
P

C

M

B
50 lb

O
S

Problem 3/24

3/25 While digging a small hole prior to planting a tree, a
homeowner encounters rocks. If he exerts a horizontal 225-N force on the prybar as shown, what is
the horizontal force exerted on rock C? Note that a
small ledge on rock C supports a vertical force
reaction there. Neglect friction at B. Complete solutions (a) including and (b) excluding the weight of
the uniform 18-kg prybar.

A

Problem 3/26

136

Chapter 3

Equilibrium

3/27 The asymmetric simple truss is loaded as shown.
Determine the reactions at A and D. Neglect the
weight of the structure compared with the applied
loads. Is knowledge of the size of the structure necessary?

3/29 The indicated location of the center of gravity of the
3600-lb pickup truck is for the unladen condition. If
a load whose center of gravity is x ϭ 16 in. behind
the rear axle is added to the truck, determine the
load weight WL for which the normal forces under
the front and rear wheels are equal.

y
WL

L
B
x
C

L

L
A

G

L
60°

60°

60°

30°

A
D

B
45″

E

67″

x

Problem 3/29
Problem 3/27

3/28 A 35-N axial force at B is required to open the
spring-loaded plunger of the water nozzle. Determine the required force F applied to the handle at A
and the magnitude of the pin reaction at O. Note
that the plunger passes through a vertically-elongated hole in the handle at B, so that negligible vertical force is transmitted there.

3/30 A block placed under the head of the claw hammer
as shown greatly facilitates the extraction of the
nail. If a 50-lb pull on the handle is required to pull
the nail, calculate the tension T in the nail and the
magnitude A of the force exerted by the hammer
head on the block. The contacting surfaces at A are
sufﬁciently rough to prevent slipping.
50 lb

B
18 mm

O

8″

38 mm

20°
A

F
10°

F
A
44 mm

2″

Problem 3/28

Problem 3/30

3

1– ″
4

Article 3/3
3/31 Because of long-term loading from the 900-N tension in the power line, the uniform utility pole has
developed a 5Њ lean. If the mass per unit length of
the 9-m pole is 24 kg/m and the mass of the lamp
ﬁxture is negligible, determine the reactions at the
ground support A.

Problems

137

1.25r

r
O
A

m
2r

Horiz.
15°
5°

Problem 3/33

Power line
Vertical
9m

3/34 The chain binder is used to secure loads of logs,
lumber, pipe, and the like. If the tension T1 is 2 kN
when ␪ ϭ 30Њ, determine the force P required on the
lever and the corresponding tension T2 for this position. Assume that the surface under A is perfectly
smooth.

A
m

0m

50

Problem 3/31

3/32 The uniform slender bar of length 3r and mass m
rests against the circular surface as shown. Determine the normal force at the contact point C and
the magnitude of the ideal pivot reaction at O.

P

0
10
mm
T1

␪
B
A

O

T2

Problem 3/34
2r

3r
C
m

r

A

3/35 The device shown is designed to apply pressure
when bonding laminate to each side of a countertop
near an edge. If a 120-N force is applied to the handle, determine the force which each roller exerts on
its corresponding surface.
120 N

Problem 3/32

m

m

3/33 The uniform slender bar of length 2r and mass m
rests against the circular surface as shown. Determine the normal force at the small roller A and the
magnitude of the ideal pivot reaction at O.

16
5

A

C

45°
30
mm
45 mm

B

30 mm
Problem 3/35

138

Chapter 3

Equilibrium

3/36 A mechanic is reinstalling a newly-sharpened blade
on a lawn mower. A wedged-in block of wood at C
prevents the blade from rotating as the 30-lb force
is applied to the wrench handle. The blade is bolted
to a bracket attached to the motor shaft O, which
protrudes through the bracket and blade. Determine the normal force at C. State any assumptions.
Does it matter whether the bolt at B is installed?

3/38 Calculate the magnitude of the force supported by
the pin at A under the action of the 1.5-kN load applied to the bracket. Neglect friction in the slot.

150 mm
B
12

A

m

0m

1.5 kN
2″
A

8″

2″
O

30°
B
Problem 3/38

6″

C

F = 30 lb

Problem 3/36

3/39 In a procedure to evaluate the strength of the triceps muscle, a person pushes down on a load cell
with the palm of his hand as indicated in the ﬁgure.
If the load-cell reading is 160 N, determine the vertical tensile force F generated by the triceps muscle.
The mass of the lower arm is 1.5 kg with mass center at G. State any assumptions.

3/37 The two light pulleys are fastened together and
form an integral unit. They are prevented from
turning about their bearing at O by a cable wound
securely around the smaller pulley and fastened to
point A. Calculate the magnitude R of the force supported by the bearing O for the applied 2-kN load.

Humerus
Triceps

Ulna
Hand

200 mm
125 mm
O

G
A

O
150 mm

150 mm

25 mm
Problem 3/39
325 mm
2 kN
Problem 3/37

Load cell

Article 3/3
3/40 A woman is holding a 3.6-kg sphere in her hand
with the entire arm held horizontally as shown in
the ﬁgure. A tensile force in the deltoid muscle prevents the arm from rotating about the shoulder
joint O; this force acts at the 21Њ angle shown. Determine the force exerted by the deltoid muscle on
the upper arm at A and the x- and y-components of
the force reaction at the shoulder joint O. The mass
of the upper arm is mU ϭ 1.9 kg, the mass of the
lower arm is mL ϭ 1.1 kg, and the mass of the hand
is mH ϭ 0.4 kg; all the corresponding weights act at
the locations shown in the ﬁgure.

Problems

139

Humerus
Biceps
Brachialis

200 mm

Ulna
Radius

10 kg

G
E

y

50 mm
3.6(9.81) N

Deltoid muscle

x

Problem 3/41

FD
O

A
21°
WU

125 mm
130 mm

WL

100 mm
350 mm

WH

412 mm
635 mm

3/42 With his weight W equally distributed on both feet,
a man begins to slowly rise from a squatting position as indicated in the ﬁgure. Determine the tensile
force F in the patellar tendon and the magnitude of
the force reaction at point O, which is the contact
area between the tibia and the femur. Note that the
line of action of the patellar tendon force is along its
midline. Neglect the weight of the lower leg.

Problem 3/40

3/41 A person is performing slow arm curls with a 10-kg
weight as indicated in the ﬁgure. The brachialis
muscle group (consisting of the biceps and
brachialis muscles) is the major factor in this exercise. Determine the magnitude F of the brachialismuscle-group force and the magnitude E of the
elbow joint reaction at point E for the forearm position shown in the ﬁgure. Take the dimensions
shown to locate the effective points of application of
the two muscle groups; these points are 200 mm directly above E and 50 mm directly to the right of E.
Include the effect of the 1.5-kg forearm mass with
mass center at point G. State any assumptions.

Quadriceps muscle
2″
O
Femur
Fibula
Tibia

40°

55°

Patella
Patellar
tendon

9″

Problem 3/42

140

Chapter 3

Equilibrium

3/43 The exercise machine is designed with a lightweight
cart which is mounted on small rollers so that it is
free to move along the inclined ramp. Two cables
are attached to the cart—one for each hand. If the
hands are together so that the cables are parallel
and if each cable lies essentially in a vertical plane,
determine the force P which each hand must exert
on its cable in order to maintain an equilibrium position. The mass of the person is 70 kg, the ramp
angle ␪ is 15Њ, and the angle ␤ is 18Њ. In addition,
calculate the force R which the ramp exerts on the
cart.

3/45 The device shown is used to test automobile-engine
valve springs. The torque wrench is directly connected to arm OB. The speciﬁcation for the automotive intake-valve spring is that 83 lb of force should
reduce its length from 2 in. (unstressed length) to
111 in. What is the corresponding reading M on
16
the torque wrench, and what force F exerted on the
torque-wrench handle is required to produce this
reading? Neglect the small effects of changes in the
angular position of arm OB.
20°

F
A

β
15″

θ

Problem 3/43

55°

3/44 The portable ﬂoor crane in the automotive shop is lifting a 420-lb engine. For the position shown compute
the magnitude of the force supported by the pin at C
and the oil pressure p against the 3.20-in.-diameter
piston of the hydraulic-cylinder unit AB.

″
42
″

18

B

C

30°

30″

O

B

6″
Problem 3/45

3/46 Calculate the normal forces associated with the
front and rear wheel pairs of the 1600-kg frontwheel-drive van. Then repeat the calculations when
the van (a) climbs a 10-percent grade and (b) descends a 10-percent grade, both at constant speed.
Compute the percent changes nA and nB in the normal forces compared with the nominal values. Be
sure to recognize that propulsive and braking forces
are present for cases (a) and (b).

A
6″
G
660 mm
Problem 3/44

A

B
1200 mm

1800 mm

Problem 3/46

Article 3/3
3/47 During an engine test on the ground, a propeller
thrust T ϭ 3000 N is generated on the 1800-kg airplane with mass center at G. The main wheels at B
are locked and do not skid; the small tail wheel at A
has no brake. Compute the percent change n in the
normal forces at A and B as compared with their
“engine-off” values.

Problems

141

3/49 A rocker arm with rollers at A and B is shown in the
position when the valve is open and the valve spring
is fully compressed. In this position, the spring force
is 900 N. Determine the force which the rocker arm
exerts on the camshaft C. Also calculate the magnitude of the force supported by the rocker-arm shaft O.
10°
48 mm

30 mm

T
12°
A

G
1.4 m

B

7 mm
O

A

0.8
m

4m

C

B

Problem 3/47

3/48 The small crane is mounted on one side of the bed of
a pickup truck. For the position ␪ ϭ 40Њ, determine
the magnitude of the force supported by the pin at
O and the oil pressure p against the 50-mm-diameter piston of the hydraulic cylinder BC.

A

7
m 85
m

3/50 The pin A, which connects the 200-kg steel beam
with center of gravity at G to the vertical column, is
welded both to the beam and to the column. To test
the weld, the 80-kg man loads the beam by exerting
a 300-N force on the rope which passes through a
hole in the beam as shown. Calculate the torque
(couple) M supported by the pin.

3
m 40
m

110
mm
120 kg

Problem 3/49

C

θ
O

B

Welded
pin

360
mm
A

G
1200 mm

600
mm

Problem 3/48

Problem 3/50

300 mm

142

Chapter 3

Equilibrium

3/51 The dolly shown is useful in the handling of 55-gallon
drums. Determine the force F necessary to hold a
drum in the position shown. You may neglect the
weight of the dolly in comparison with the 500-lb
weight of the drum, whose center of gravity is at G.
There is sufﬁcient friction to prevent slipping at the
contact point P.

3/53 The uniform bar OC of length L pivots freely about
a horizontal axis through O. If the spring of modulus k is unstretched when C is coincident with A, determine the tension T required to hold the bar in
the 45Њ position shown. The diameter of the small
pulley at D is negligible.
T
D
O
L/2

36″
F

45°

30°

B

17″

L/2

6″

G

k

m
C

12″

C
A

25°
P
Problem 3/51

Problem 3/53

3/52 A portion of the shifter mechanism for a manual car
transmission is shown in the ﬁgure. For the 8-N
force exerted on the shift knob, determine the corresponding force P exerted by the shift link BC on the
transmission (not shown). Neglect friction in the
ball-and-socket joint at O, in the joint at B, and in
the slip tube near support D. Note that a soft rubber
bushing at D allows the slip tube to self-align with
link BC.

3/54 To test the deﬂection of the uniform 200-lb beam
the 120-lb boy exerts a pull of 40 lb on the rope
rigged as shown. Compute the force supported by
the pin at the hinge O.
4′

25 mm
8N

A

A

O

5°
2′

6′

188 mm
25 mm

Problem 3/54
15°

B

75 mm

D

Slip tube
C

O

Problem 3/52

P

2′

Article 3/3
3/55 The cargo door for an airplane of circular fuselage
section consists of the uniform semicircular cowling
AB of mass m. Determine the compression C in the
horizontal strut at B to hold the door open in the
position shown. Also ﬁnd an expression for the total
force supported by the hinge at A. (Consult Table
D/3 of Appendix D for the position of the centroid or
mass center of the cowling.)

Problems

143

3/57 It is desired that a person be able to begin closing
the van hatch from the open position shown with a
10-lb vertical force P. As a design exercise, determine the necessary force in each of the two hydraulic struts AB. The center of gravity of the 90-lb
door is 1.5 in. directly below point A. Treat the
problem as two-dimensional.
A
22″
O

A
24″

45″

r

A

Hinge axis

7″
B
Strut detail

30°

O

Horiz.
B
Light strut

B
P

Closed position of B
Problem 3/55

3/56 Determine the external reactions at A and F for the
roof truss loaded as shown. The vertical loads represent the effect of the supported rooﬁng materials,
while the 400-N force represents a wind load.

3/58 The pipe bender consists of two grooved pulleys
mounted and free to turn on a ﬁxed frame. The pipe
is bent into the shape shown by a force P ϭ 300 N.
Calculate the forces supported by the bearings of
the pulleys.

500 N
500 N
C
400 N
y

60°

D

B

Problem 3/57

500 N
250 N

26 mm

E
250 N
A

60°

30°

30°
G

30°

F

x

P

24 mm
A

42 mm
B

10 m
Problem 3/56

500 mm

150 mm
Problem 3/58

144

Chapter 3

Equilibrium

3/59 Certain elements of an in-refrigerator ice-cube
maker are shown in the ﬁgure. (A “cube” has the
form of a cylindrical segment!) Once the cube
freezes and a small heater (not shown) forms a thin
ﬁlm of water between the cube and supporting surface, a motor rotates the ejector arm OA to remove
the cube. If there are eight cubes and eight arms,
determine the required torque M as a function of ␪.
The mass of eight cubes is 0.25 kg, and the centerof-mass distance r ϭ 0.55r. Neglect friction, and assume that the resultant of the distributed normal
force acting on the cube passes through point O.
m

8

m

᭤3/60 The lumbar portion of the human spine supports the
entire weight of the upper torso and the force load
imposed on it. We consider here the disk (shaded red)
between the lowest vertebra of the lumbar region
(L5) and the uppermost vertebra of the sacrum region. (a) For the case L ϭ 0, determine the compressive force C and the shear force S supported by this
disk in terms of the body weight W. The weight Wu of
the upper torso (above the disk in question) is 68% of
the total body weight W and acts at G1. The vertical
force F which the rectus muscles of the back exert on
the upper torso acts as shown in the ﬁgure. (b) Repeat for the case when the person holds a weight of
magnitude L ϭ W /3 as shown. State any assumptions.

25 mm
O
M
–
r
G
A
r = 37 mm

G1
Wu
L3
L4
L5

G2

41°
F

Sacrum
L

A
300 mm
Problem 3/59

50 mm

Problem 3/60

Article 3/4

SECTION B
3/4

EQUILIBRIUM IN THREE DIMENSIONS

Equilibrium Conditions

We now extend our principles and methods developed for twodimensional equilibrium to the case of three-dimensional equilibrium.
In Art. 3/1 the general conditions for the equilibrium of a body were
stated in Eqs. 3/1, which require that the resultant force and resultant
couple on a body in equilibrium be zero. These two vector equations of
equilibrium and their scalar components may be written as

(3/3)

The ﬁrst three scalar equations state that there is no resultant force acting on a body in equilibrium in any of the three coordinate directions.
The second three scalar equations express the further equilibrium requirement that there be no resultant moment acting on the body about
any of the coordinate axes or about axes parallel to the coordinate axes.
These six equations are both necessary and sufﬁcient conditions for
complete equilibrium. The reference axes may be chosen arbitrarily as a
matter of convenience, the only restriction being that a right-handed coordinate system should be chosen when vector notation is used.
The six scalar relationships of Eqs. 3/3 are independent conditions
because any of them can be valid without the others. For example, for a
car which accelerates on a straight and level road in the x-direction,
Newton’s second law tells us that the resultant force on the car equals
its mass times its acceleration. Thus ΣFx
0, but the remaining two
force–equilibrium equations are satisﬁed because all other acceleration
components are zero. Similarly, if the ﬂywheel of the engine of the accelerating car is rotating with increasing angular speed about the x-axis, it
is not in rotational equilibrium about this axis. Thus, for the ﬂywheel
alone, ΣMx 0 along with ΣFx 0, but the remaining four equilibrium
equations for the ﬂywheel would be satisﬁed for its mass-center axes.
In applying the vector form of Eqs. 3/3, we ﬁrst express each of the
forces in terms of the coordinate unit vectors i, j, and k. For the ﬁrst
equation, ΣF ϭ 0, the vector sum will be zero only if the coefﬁcients of i,
j, and k in the expression are, respectively, zero. These three sums,
when each is set equal to zero, yield precisely the three scalar equations
of equilibrium, ΣFx ϭ 0, ΣFy ϭ 0, and ΣFz ϭ 0.
For the second equation, ΣM ϭ 0, where the moment sum may be
taken about any convenient point O, we express the moment of each
force as the cross product r ؋ F, where r is the position vector from O to
any point on the line of action of the force F. Thus ΣM ϭ Σ(r ؋ F) ϭ 0.

Equilibrium Conditions

145

146

Chapter 3

Equilibrium

When the coefﬁcients of i, j, and k in the resulting moment equation are
set equal to zero, respectively, we obtain the three scalar moment equations ΣMx ϭ 0, ΣMy ϭ 0, and ΣMz ϭ 0.

Free-Body Diagrams
The summations in Eqs. 3/3 include the effects of all forces on the
body under consideration. We learned in the previous article that the
free-body diagram is the only reliable method for disclosing all forces
and moments which should be included in our equilibrium equations. In
three dimensions the free-body diagram serves the same essential purpose as it does in two dimensions and should always be drawn. We have
our choice either of drawing a pictorial view of the isolated body with all
external forces represented or of drawing the orthogonal projections of
the free-body diagram. Both representations are illustrated in the sample problems at the end of this article.
The correct representation of forces on the free-body diagram requires a knowledge of the characteristics of contacting surfaces. These
characteristics were described in Fig. 3/1 for two-dimensional problems,
and their extension to three-dimensional problems is represented in Fig.
3/8 for the most common situations of force transmission. The representations in both Figs. 3/1 and 3/8 will be used in three-dimensional analysis.
The essential purpose of the free-body diagram is to develop a reliable picture of the physical action of all forces (and couples if any) acting
on a body. So it is helpful to represent the forces in their correct physical sense whenever possible. In this way, the free-body diagram becomes
a closer model to the actual physical problem than it would be if the
forces were arbitrarily assigned or always assigned in the same mathematical sense as that of the assigned coordinate axis.
For example, in part 4 of Fig. 3/8, the correct sense of the unknowns
Rx and Ry may be known or perceived to be in the sense opposite to those
of the assigned coordinate axes. Similar conditions apply to the sense of
couple vectors, parts 5 and 6, where their sense by the right-hand rule
may be assigned opposite to that of the respective coordinate direction. By
this time, you should recognize that a negative answer for an unknown
force or couple vector merely indicates that its physical action is in the
sense opposite to that assigned on the free-body diagram. Frequently, of
course, the correct physical sense is not known initially, so that an arbitrary assignment on the free-body diagram becomes necessary.
Categories of Equilibrium
Application of Eqs. 3/3 falls into four categories which we identify
with the aid of Fig. 3/9. These categories differ in the number and type
(force or moment) of independent equilibrium equations required to
solve the problem.
Category 1, equilibrium of forces all concurrent at point O, requires all three force equations, but no moment equations because the
moment of the forces about any axis through O is zero.
Category 2, equilibrium of forces which are concurrent with a line,
requires all equations except the moment equation about that line,
which is automatically satisﬁed.

Article 3/4

Equilibrium Conditions

MODELING THE ACTION OF FORCES IN THREE-DIMENSIONAL ANALYSIS
Type of Contact and Force Origin

Action on Body to Be Isolated

1. Member in contact with smooth
surface, or ball-supported member
z
z

z
Force must be normal to the
surface and directed toward
the member.
x

y

x

2. Member in contact
with rough
surface

y

N

y

x

z

z

The possibility exists for a
force F tangent to the surface
(friction force) to act on the
member, as well as a normal
force N.

F
y

x
3. Roller or wheel support
with lateral
constraint

x

y

N

z

z
A lateral force P exerted by the
guide on the wheel can exist, in
addition to the normal force N.
P
y

x

x

y

N
z

4. Ball-and-socket joint
z

Ry

Rx

y

Rz

x
x

A ball-and-socket joint free to
pivot about the center of the
ball can support a force R with
all three components.

y

5. Fixed connection (embedded or welded)
z

z

Ry

Rx

Rz

x
Mx

y

x
6. Thrust-bearing support
z

My
y

Mz
z

Ry
Rx
x
y

Mx

x

Figure 3/8

In addition to three components
of force, a fixed connection
can support a couple M
represented by its three
components.

Rz
Mz

y

Thrust bearing is capable of
supporting axial force Ry as
well as radial forces Rx and Rz.
Couples Mx and Mz must, in
some cases, be assumed zero
in order to provide statical
determinacy.

147

148

Chapter 3

Equilibrium

CATEGORIES OF EQUILIBRIUM IN THREE DIMENSIONS
Force System
1. Concurrent
at a point

Free-Body Diagram
y
F2

F1

Independent Equations

x
O
z
F3

F5

ΣFx = 0
ΣFy = 0
ΣFz = 0

F4
2. Concurrent
with a line

y

F2

x

F1

ΣFx = 0
z
F3

ΣFy = 0

ΣMz = 0

ΣFz = 0

F4

F5

y

F1

3. Parallel

ΣMy = 0

F2
F3

F5

x

ΣFx = 0

ΣMy = 0

z

ΣMz = 0

F4
4. General
F1

F2

M

y
x
z

F4

ΣFx = 0

ΣMx = 0

ΣFy = 0

ΣMy = 0

ΣFz = 0

ΣMz = 0

F3

Figure 3/9

Category 3, equilibrium of parallel forces, requires only one force
equation, the one in the direction of the forces (x-direction as shown),
and two moment equations about the axes (y and z) which are normal to
the direction of the forces.
Category 4, equilibrium of a general system of forces, requires all
three force equations and all three moment equations.
The observations contained in these statements are generally quite
evident when a given problem is being solved.

Constraints and Statical Determinacy
The six scalar relations of Eqs. 3/3, although necessary and sufﬁcient conditions to establish equilibrium, do not necessarily provide all
of the information required to calculate the unknown forces acting in a
three-dimensional equilibrium situation. Again, as we found with two
dimensions, the question of adequacy of information is decided by the

Article 3/4

characteristics of the constraints provided by the supports. An analytical criterion for determining the adequacy of constraints is available,
but it is beyond the scope of this treatment.* In Fig. 3/10, however, we
cite four examples of constraint conditions to alert the reader to the
problem.
Part a of Fig. 3/10 shows a rigid body whose corner point A is completely ﬁxed by the links 1, 2, and 3. Links 4, 5, and 6 prevent rotations
about the axes of links 1, 2, and 3, respectively, so that the body is completely ﬁxed and the constraints are said to be adequate. Part b of the ﬁgure shows the same number of constraints, but we see that they provide
no resistance to a moment which might be applied about axis AE. Here
the body is incompletely ﬁxed and only partially constrained.
Similarly, in Fig. 3/10c the constraints provide no resistance to an
unbalanced force in the y-direction, so here also is a case of incomplete
ﬁxity with partial constraints. In Fig. 3/10d, if a seventh constraining
link were imposed on a system of six constraints placed properly for
complete ﬁxity, more supports would be provided than would be necessary to establish the equilibrium position, and link 7 would be redundant. The body would then be statically indeterminate with such a
seventh link in place. With only a few exceptions, the supporting constraints for rigid bodies in equilibrium in this book are adequate, and
the bodies are statically determinate.

Equilibrium Conditions

D

C
4

1 A
2 3

149

6
B
5

(a) Complete fixity
Adequate constraints

A

E

(b) Incomplete fixity
Partial constraints
y

© Zoran Djekic/iStockphoto

(c) Incomplete fixity
Partial constraints

The three-dimensional equilibrium of this bridge tower must be carefully
analyzed in the design process so as to avoid excessive net horizontal
force applied by the cable system, which would tend to bend the tower.

*See the ﬁrst author’s Statics, 2nd Edition SI Version, 1975, Art. 16.

7

(d) Excessive fixity
Redundant constraints

Figure 3/10

150

Chapter 3

Equilibrium

SAMPLE PROBLEM 3/5
The uniform 7-m steel shaft has a mass of 200 kg and is supported by a balland-socket joint at A in the horizontal ﬂoor. The ball end B rests against the
smooth vertical walls as shown. Compute the forces exerted by the walls and the
ﬂoor on the ends of the shaft.

B
7m

A

The free-body diagram of the shaft is ﬁrst drawn where the contact
forces acting on the shaft at B are shown normal to the wall surfaces. In addition
to the weight W ϭ mg ϭ 200(9.81) ϭ 1962 N, the force exerted by the ﬂoor on
the ball joint at A is represented by its x-, y-, and z-components. These compoᕡ nents are shown in their correct physical sense, as should be evident from the requirement that A be held in place. The vertical position of B is found from
7 ϭ Ί22 ϩ 62 ϩ h2, h ϭ 3 m. Right-handed coordinate axes are assigned as shown.

Solution.

2m

6m

z
Bx

By
B

5
3.
m

h

G
W = mg
x

where the mass center G is located halfway between A and B.
The vector moment equation gives
[ΣMA ϭ 0]

y

m

rAB ϭ Ϫ2i Ϫ 6j ϩ 3k m

and

5

rAG ϭ Ϫ1i Ϫ 3j ϩ 1.5k m

3.

Vector solution. We will use A as a moment center to eliminate reference to
the forces at A. The position vectors needed to compute the moments about A are
6m

A
2m
Ax

rAB ؋ (Bx ϩ By) ϩ rAG ؋ W ϭ 0

Ay
Az

(Ϫ2i Ϫ 6j ϩ 3k) ؋ (Bxi ϩ By j) ϩ (Ϫi Ϫ 3j ϩ 1.5k) ؋ (Ϫ1962k) ϭ 0
Helpful Hints

ᕡ We could, of course, assign all of the
(Ϫ3By ϩ 5890)i ϩ (3Bx Ϫ 1962)j ϩ (Ϫ2By ϩ 6Bx)k ϭ 0
Equating the coefﬁcients of i, j, and k to zero and solving give

ᕢ

Bx ϭ 654 N

By ϭ 1962 N

and

Ans.

The forces at A are easily determined by
[ΣF ϭ 0]

(654 Ϫ Ax)i ϩ (1962 Ϫ Ay)j ϩ (Ϫ1962 ϩ Az)k ϭ 0

and

Ax ϭ 654 N

Finally,

2

Ay ϭ 1962 N
2

A ϭ ΊAx ϩ Ay ϩ Az

ᕢ Note that the third equation Ϫ2By ϩ

Az ϭ 1962 N

2

ϭ Ί(654)2 ϩ (1962)2 ϩ (1962)2 ϭ 2850 N

Ans.

Scalar solution. Evaluating the scalar moment equations about axes through
A parallel, respectively, to the x- and y-axes, gives
[ΣMAx ϭ 0]

1962(3) Ϫ 3By ϭ 0

ᕣ [ΣMAy ϭ 0]

Ϫ1962(1) ϩ 3Bx ϭ 0

By ϭ 1962 N
Bx ϭ 654 N

The force equations give, simply,
[ΣFx ϭ 0]

ϪAx ϩ 654 ϭ 0

Ax ϭ 654 N

[ΣFy ϭ 0]

ϪAy ϩ 1962 ϭ 0

Ay ϭ 1962 N

[ΣFz ϭ 0]

Az Ϫ 1962 ϭ 0

Az ϭ 1962 N

unknown components of force in the
positive mathematical sense, in which
case Ax and Ay would turn out to be
negative upon computation. The freebody diagram describes the physical
situation, so it is generally preferable
to show the forces in their correct
physical senses wherever possible.
6Bx ϭ 0 merely checks the results of
the ﬁrst two equations. This result
could be anticipated from the fact
that an equilibrium system of forces
concurrent with a line requires only
two moment equations (Category 2
under Categories of Equilibrium).

ᕣ We observe that a moment sum
about an axis through A parallel to
the z-axis merely gives us 6Bx Ϫ
2By ϭ 0, which serves only as a
check as noted previously. Alternatively we could have first obtained
Az from ΣFz ϭ 0 and then taken
our moment equations about axes
through B to obtain A x and A y.

Article 3/4

Equilibrium Conditions

SAMPLE PROBLEM 3/6
A 200-N force is applied to the handle of the hoist in the direction shown.
The bearing A supports the thrust (force in the direction of the shaft axis), while
bearing B supports only radial load (load normal to the shaft axis). Determine
the mass m which can be supported and the total radial force exerted on the
shaft by each bearing. Assume neither bearing to be capable of supporting a moment about a line normal to the shaft axis.

151

y

100
150
B

75

200 N

100 250
60°

A
100

x
Radial
bearing

Thrust
bearing

45°
z

m

The system is clearly three-dimensional with no lines or planes of
symmetry, and therefore the problem must be analyzed as a general space system of forces. A scalar solution is used here to illustrate this approach, although
a solution using vector notation would also be satisfactory. The free-body diagram of the shaft, lever, and drum considered a single body could be shown by a
ᕡ space view if desired, but is represented here by its three orthogonal projections.
The 200-N force is resolved into its three components, and each of the three
views shows two of these components. The correct directions of Ax and Bx may be
seen by inspection by observing that the line of action of the resultant of the two
70.7-N forces passes between A and B. The correct sense of the forces Ay and By
cannot be determined until the magnitudes of the moments are obtained, so they
are arbitrarily assigned. The x-y projection of the bearing forces is shown in
terms of the sums of the unknown x- and y-components. The addition of Az and
the weight W ϭ mg completes the free-body diagrams. It should be noted that
the three views represent three two-dimensional problems related by the corresponding components of the forces.

Dimensions in millimeters

Solution.

ᕢ

From the x-y projection:
[ΣMO ϭ 0]

m ϭ 44.1 kg

70.7 N
Az
Bx

z
Ax

Az
By

Ay

mg = 9.81m

y

173.2 N

z
70.7 N

y

173.2 N
O

x

70.7 N

Ay + By
Ax + Bx
mg = 9.81m

Ans.

ᕡ If the standard three views of orthographic projection are not entirely
familiar, then review and practice
them. Visualize the three views as
the images of the body projected
onto the front, top, and end surfaces
of a clear plastic box placed over and
aligned with the body.

From the x-z projection:
[ΣMA ϭ0]

150Bx ϩ 175(70.7) Ϫ 250(70.7) ϭ 0

Bx ϭ 35.4 N

[ΣFx ϭ 0]

Ax ϩ 35.4 Ϫ 70.7 ϭ 0

Ax ϭ 35.4 N

ᕣ The y-z view gives
[ΣMA ϭ 0]

150By ϩ 175(173.2) Ϫ 250(44.1)(9.81) ϭ 0

By ϭ 520 N

[ΣFy ϭ 0]

Ay ϩ 520 Ϫ 173.2 Ϫ (44.1)(9.81) ϭ 0

Ay ϭ 86.8 N

[ΣFz ϭ 0]

Az ϭ 70.7 N

ᕢ We could have started with the x-z
projection rather than with the x-y
projection.

ᕣ The y-z view could have followed immediately after the x-y view since
the determination of Ay and By may
be made after m is found.

The total radial forces on the bearings become

ᕤ [B ϭ ΊBx2 ϩ By2]

70.7 N

Helpful Hints

100(9.81m) Ϫ 250(173.2) ϭ 0

[Ar ϭ ΊAx2 ϩ Ay2]

x

Ar ϭ Ί(35.4)2 ϩ (86.8)2 ϭ 93.5 N

Ans.

B ϭ Ί(35.4)2 ϩ (520)2 ϭ 521 N

Ans.

ᕤ Without the assumption of zero moment supported by each bearing
about a line normal to the shaft axis,
the problem would be statically indeterminate.

152

Chapter 3

Equilibrium

SAMPLE PROBLEM 3/7

z
3

The welded tubular frame is secured to the horizontal x-y plane by a balland-socket joint at A and receives support from the loose-ﬁtting ring at B. Under
the action of the 2-kN load, rotation about a line from A to B is prevented by the
cable CD, and the frame is stable in the position shown. Neglect the weight of
the frame compared with the applied load and determine the tension T in the
cable, the reaction at the ring, and the reaction components at A.

m

5

2.

4.5

2.5 m

A

The system is clearly three-dimensional with no lines or planes of
symmetry, and therefore the problem must be analyzed as a general space system of forces. The free-body diagram is drawn, where the ring reaction is shown
in terms of its two components. All unknowns except T may be eliminated by a
moment sum about the line AB. The direction of AB is speciﬁed by the unit
ᕡ vector n ϭ 2 1 2 (4.5j ϩ 6k) ϭ 1(3j ϩ 4k). The moment of T about AB
5
Ί6 ϩ 4.5

x

ᕢ

r1 ϭ Ϫi ϩ 2.5j m

y

1m

E

T

F=

Bx

2 kN

Bz
r2

T
(2i ϩ 2.5j Ϫ 6k)
Ί46.2

D

z

is the component in the direction of AB of the vector moment about the point A
and equals r1 ؋ T ⅐ n. Similarly the moment of the applied load F about AB is
r2 ؋ F ⅐ n. With CD ϭ Ί46.2 m, the vector expressions for T, F, r1, and r2 are

Tϭ

B

m

2 kN

6m

Solution.

C

m

n

F ϭ 2j kN
Ay

Ax
D

r1

r2 ϭ 2.5i ϩ 6k m

Az

x

The moment equation now becomes

y

z

[ΣMAB ϭ 0]

B
n

T
(2i ϩ 2.5j Ϫ 6k) ⅐ 1(3j ϩ 4k)
(Ϫi ϩ 2.5j) ؋
5
Ί46.2
ϩ (2.5i ϩ 6k) ؋ (2j) ⅐ 1(3j ϩ 4k) ϭ 0
5

r1

T· n
r1

T

Completion of the vector operations gives
Ϫ

48T
Ί46.2

ϩ 20 ϭ 0

T ϭ 2.83 kN

A

Ans.

y

Helpful Hints

and the components of T become
Tx ϭ 0.833 kN

x

ᕡ The advantage of using vector notaTy ϭ 1.042 kN

Tz ϭ Ϫ2.50 kN

We may ﬁnd the remaining unknowns by moment and force summations as
follows:
[ΣMz ϭ 0]

2(2.5) Ϫ 4.5Bx Ϫ 1.042(3) ϭ 0

[ΣMx ϭ 0]

4.5Bz Ϫ 2(6) Ϫ 1.042(6) ϭ 0

[ΣFx ϭ 0]

Ax ϩ 0.417 ϩ 0.833 ϭ 0

ᕣ [ΣFy ϭ 0]

Ay ϩ 2 ϩ 1.042 ϭ 0

[ΣFz ϭ 0]

Az ϩ 4.06 Ϫ 2.50 ϭ 0

tion in this problem is the freedom
to take moments directly about any
axis. In this problem this freedom
permits the choice of an axis that
eliminates ﬁve of the unknowns.

ᕢ Recall that the vector r in the expres-

Bx ϭ 0.417 kN

Ans.

Bz ϭ 4.06 kN

Ans.

Ax ϭ Ϫ1.250 kN

Ans.

Ay ϭ Ϫ3.04 kN

Ans.

sion r ؋ F for the moment of a force
is a vector from the moment center to
any point on the line of action of the
force. Instead of r1, an equally simple
l
choice would be the vector AC .

Az ϭ Ϫ1.556 kN

Ans.

ᕣ The negative signs associated with
the A-components indicate that they
are in the opposite direction to those
shown on the free-body diagram.

Article 3/4

Problems

153

PROBLEMS
Introductory Problems
B

3/61 A force of magnitude P ϭ 180 N is applied to the
stationary machine handle as shown. Write the
force and moment reactions at O as vectors. Neglect
the weight of the handle assembly.

A

C

6″

z

9″
12″

A

9″

P
15°

Problem 3/63

O
125 mm
x

200 mm
y

3/64 The uniform I-beam has a mass of 60 kg per meter
of its length. Determine the tension in the two supporting cables and the reaction at D.
B

2m
2m
C

Problem 3/61
3m

3/62 Determine the tensions in cables AB, AC, and AD.
C

D

1′

A

5m

3′

3′
3′

1m

2m

D

Problem 3/64

B
4′
A

3/65 Determine the tensions in the three cables which
support the uniform 80-kg plate whose shape is that
of an equilateral triangle. The mass center G of the
plate is located one-third of the distance MC from M.

100 lb

Problem 3/62

3/63 A uniform steel plate 18 in. square weighing 68 lb is
suspended in the horizontal plane by the three vertical wires as shown. Calculate the tension in each
wire.

20°

B
6m

0.

2

1.

M

20°
m

G

m

0.6

A
C
1.2 m
Problem 3/65

154

Chapter 3

Equilibrium

3/66 The young tree, originally bent, has been brought
into the vertical position by adjusting the three guywire tensions to AB ϭ 0, AC ϭ 10 lb, and AD ϭ 15
lb. Determine the force and moment reactions at
the trunk base point O. Neglect the weight of the
tree.

3/68 The vertical and horizontal poles at the trafﬁc-light
assembly are erected ﬁrst. Determine the additional
force and moment reactions at the base O caused by
the addition of the three 100-lb trafﬁc signals B, C,
and D. Report your answers as a force magnitude
and a moment magnitude.
z

z

25′
25′
A

A

35′

C

B

5′

D

B

100 lb
D

100 lb

O
5′

3′

5′

x

100 lb
O

3′
y

C
x
y

Problem 3/66

3/67 The vertical mast supports the 4-kN force and is
constrained by the two ﬁxed cables BC and BD and
by a ball-and-socket connection at A. Calculate the
tension T1 in BD. Can this be accomplished by using
only one equation of equilibrium?

Problem 3/68

3/69 The body is constructed of uniform slender rod
which has mass ␳ per unit length. Determine the
magnitudes of the force and moment reactions at
the built-in support O.

z
a
––
4

B

b
––
3

2b
––
3

3a
––
4
5m

T1

T2

z

C

5m

4 kN

c

D

y
4m

2m

5m

O

4m

x

A
x

Problem 3/67

Problem 3/69

y

Article 3/4
3/70 When on level ground, the car is placed on four individual scales—one under each tire. The four scale
readings are 4300 N at A, 2900 N at B, 3000 N at C,
and 4600 N at D. Determine the x- and y-coordinates
of the mass center G and the mass of the car.

Problems

155

3/72 The body is constructed of slender rod which has a
mass ␳ per unit length. Determine the force and moment reactions at O.
z
a

y

O

A

B
x
y

760 mm
b

x

O

760 mm
D

c

C
2640 mm
Problem 3/70

Problem 3/72

3/71 An overhead view of a car is shown in the ﬁgure.
Two different locations C and D are considered for a
single jack. In each case, the entire right side of the
car is lifted just off the ground. Determine the normal reaction forces at A and B and the vertical jacking force required for the case of each jacking
location. Consider the 1600-kg car to be rigid. The
mass center G is on the midline of the car.

3/73 The light right-angle boom which supports the 400kg cylinder is supported by three cables and a balland-socket joint at O attached to the vertical x-y
surface. Determine the reactions at O and the cable
tensions.
y
1m
1.5 m

A

B
D

C
1400
mm

C

1575 mm

G

1m

D
280
mm

O

E 1m

1120
mm

Problem 3/71

x
A

2m

z
0.75 m

B
0.75 m
400 kg

Problem 3/73

156

Chapter 3

Equilibrium

3/74 The industrial door is a uniform rectangular panel
weighing 1200 lb and rolls along the ﬁxed rail D on
its hanger-mounted wheels A and B. The door is
maintained in a vertical plane by the ﬂoor-mounted
guide roller C, which bears against the bottom edge.
For the position shown compute the horizontal side
thrust on each of the wheels A and B, which must
be accounted for in the design of the brackets.

3/76 The large bracket is constructed of heavy plate
which has a mass ␳ per unit area. Determine the
force and moment reactions at the support bolt at O.
y
a
––
2

c

b

O
z

6′′

10′
3′

h

3′
B

x

A

z
a
10′

D

Problem 3/76
y
Detail of
door hanger

3/77 A uniform steel ring 60 in. in diameter and weighing 600 lb is lifted by the three cables, each 50 in.
long, attached at points A, B, and C as shown. Compute the tension in each cable.

5′
C

x
Problem 3/74

3/75 The two I-beams are welded together and are initially
supported by the three cables of equal length hanging
vertically from supports directly above A, B, and C.
When applied with the appropriate offset d, the 200-N
force causes the system to assume the new equilibrium conﬁguration shown. All three cables are inclined at the same angle ␪ from the vertical, in planes
parallel to the y-z plane. Determine this deﬂection ␪
and the proper offset d. Beams AB and OC have
masses of 72 kg and 50 kg, respectively. The mass
center of beam OC has a y-coordinate of 725 mm.

TC
y

θ

z

TA

TB

C

A
O
120
0
mm

200 N

B

d

00
14 m
m

x
800
mm

Problem 3/75

50′′
C
30′′

120°
90°

A
B
Problem 3/77

Article 3/4

Problems

157

Representative Problems
3/78 The three-wheel truck is used to carry the 100-kg
box as shown. Calculate the changes in the normal
force reactions at the three wheels due to the weight
of the box.

3′

B

250 mm

100 kg

T

G

500 mm
A

C

625 mm

3′

375 mm

550 mm

4′

2′
Problem 3/78

4′

6′

3/79 The square steel plate has a mass of 1800 kg with
mass center at its center G. Calculate the tension in
each of the three cables with which the plate is
lifted while remaining horizontal.

Problem 3/80

3/81 The smooth homogeneous sphere rests in the 120Њ
groove and bears against the end plate, which is
normal to the direction of the groove. Determine the
angle ␪, measured from the horizontal, for which
the reaction on each side of the groove equals the
force supported by the end plate.

D

2400
mm
C 1200 mm
G

60°
60°

1200 mm

A

1200 mm

2400 mm

End view
of V-groove

B
Problem 3/79

3/80 The two uniform rectangular plates each weighing
800 lb are freely hinged about their common edge
and suspended by the central cable and four symmetrical corner cables. Calculate the tension T in
each of the corner cables and the tension T0 in the
center cable.

θ

Horizontal

Problem 3/81

158

Chapter 3

Equilibrium

3/82 Because of a combination of soil support conditions
and the tension in the single power cable, the utility
pole has developed the indicated 5Њ lean. The 9-m
uniform pole has a mass per unit length of 25 kg/m,
and the tension in the power cable is 900 N. Determine the reactions at the base O. Note that the
power cable lies in a vertical plane parallel to the x-z
plane.

3/84 A smooth homogeneous sphere of mass m and radius r is suspended by a wire AB of length 2r from
point B on the line of intersection of the two smooth
vertical walls at right angles to one another. Determine the reaction R of each wall against the sphere.
z

B

z

2r
15°

A
A
Power line

x′

r

5°
9m
x
y
y
Problem 3/84

30°
O
x
Problem 3/82

3/83 As part of a check on its design, a lower A-arm (part
of an automobile suspension) is supported by bearings at A and B and subjected to the pair of 900-N
forces at C and D. The suspension spring, not shown
for clarity, exerts a force FS at E as shown, where E
is in plane ABCD. Determine the magnitude FS of
the spring force and the magnitudes FA and FB of
the bearing forces at A and B which are perpendicular to the hinge axis AB.

3/85 A rider holds her bicycle at the 10Њ angle shown by
exerting a force perpendicular to the plane of the bicycle frame. If friction at A and B is sufﬁcient to
prevent lateral slippage, determine the force exerted
by the rider on the seat, the upward normal forces
at A and B, and the lateral friction forces at A and
B. Even though the bicycle is free to roll, assume
that it does not. The bicycle weighs 29 lb with center of gravity at G.

6.5″
12″

C

15°

Fs

B
170 mm

420 mm

vertical

37″
E
190 mm

A

G
20″

180
mm

D
900 N

C 120
mm
900 N

A
41″

Problem 3/83
Problem 3/85

B

Article 3/4
3/86 The 100-lb uniform square plate is supported by a
ball-and-socket joint at O, a cable at E, a ﬁxture at A
which can support vertical force only, and a linear
spring at C. If the unstretched length of the spring
is 6 in., determine the spring constant k required for
equilibrium in the position shown.

Problems

159

120 N·m

A

200 mm
80 mm

z
B

16″

600 mm

F
A
6″
D
x

12″

200 mm
400 mm

y

18″

E
18″

C
24″

16″

B

O

C

k
10″

D

Problem 3/86

Problem 3/88

3/87 During a test, the left engine of the twin-engine airplane is revved up and a 2-kN thrust is generated.
The main wheels at B and C are braked in order to
prevent motion. Determine the change (compared
with the nominal values with both engines off) in
the normal reaction forces at A, B, and C.

3/89 The uniform panel door weighs 60 lb and is prevented from opening by the strut C, which is a light
two-force member whose upper end is secured
under the door knob and whose lower end is attached to a rubber cup which does not slip on the
ﬂoor. Of the door hinges A and B, only B can support force in the vertical z-direction. Calculate the
compression C in the strut and the horizontal components of the forces supported by hinges A and B
when a horizontal force P ϭ 50 lb is applied normal
to the plane of the door as shown.
z

T = 2 kN

48″

P

C

8″
A

B
4m

2m

A

2.4 m

40″

2.4 m

8″

Problem 3/87

3/88 The uniform 15-kg plate is welded to the vertical
shaft, which is supported by bearings A and B.
Calculate the magnitude of the force supported by
bearing B during application of the 120-N ⅐ m couple
to the shaft. The cable from C to D prevents the
plate and shaft from turning, and the weight of the
assembly is carried entirely by bearing A.

B

40″
C

8″

x
30″
8″
y
Problem 3/89

160

Chapter 3

Equilibrium

3/90 The spring of modulus k ϭ 900 N/m is stretched a
distance ␦ ϭ 60 mm when the mechanism is in the
position shown. Calculate the force Pmin required to
initiate rotation about the hinge axis BC, and determine the corresponding magnitudes of the bearing
forces which are perpendicular to BC. What is the
normal reaction force at D if P ϭ Pmin /2?
90
mm

55
mm

C

135
mm

k = 900 N/m

3/92 Consider the rudder assembly of a radio-controlled
model airplane. For the 15Њ position shown in the
ﬁgure, the net pressure acting on the left side of the
rectangular rudder area is p ϭ 4(10Ϫ5) N/mm2. Determine the required force P in the control rod DE
and the horizontal components of the reactions at
hinges A and B which are parallel to the rudder surface. Assume the aerodynamic pressure to be uniform.
32

D

16
B

12
165
mm

45 mm
42

45 mm

B

55
mm

A

P

16
10

A
135
mm

P

C
E

15°
D

22

40 mm

Dimensions in
millimeters

Problem 3/90

3/91 Determine the forces on the bearings A and B if a
30-lb force on the crank is required to maintain
equilibrium of the crankshaft of a single-cylinder
engine against a compression in the 10-in. connecting rod in the direction CD.
x
C

Problem 3/92

3/93 The uniform 30- by 40-in. trap door weighs 200 lb
and is propped open by the light strut AB at the
angle ␪ ϭ tanϪ1 (4/3). Calculate the compression FB
in the strut and the force supported by the hinge D
normal to the hinge axis. Assume that the hinges
act at the extreme ends of the lower edge.
32″

8″

10″
A
30″
O

B

B
D

D

4″

4″

z
y

4
θ = tan–1 —
3

C

4″

30″
A

4″

8″

30 lb
Problem 3/93

2″

Problem 3/91

Article 3/4
᭤3/94 Under the action of the 40-N ⅐ m torque (couple)
applied to the vertical shaft, the restraining cable
AC limits the rotation of the arm OA and attached
shaft to an angle of 60Њ measured from the y-axis.
The collar D fastened to the shaft prevents downward motion of the shaft in its bearing. Calculate
the bending moment M, the compression P, and the
shear force V in the shaft at section B. (Note: Bending moment, expressed as a vector, is normal to the
shaft axis, and shear force is also normal to the
shaft axis.)

Problems

F

R

100
mm

A

80 mm
40 mm

200
mm
G

300 mm

B

x

y

z
160 mm

161

Bx

A

O

Bz

60°
x

y

110 mm

C
B
D

200 mm
z
Problem 3/95

40 N·m
C
180 mm

Problem 3/94

᭤3/95 The electric sander has a mass of 3 kg with mass
center at G and is held in a slightly tilted position
(z-axis vertical) so that the sanding disk makes contact at its top A with the surface being sanded. The
sander is gripped by its handles at B and C. If the
normal force R against the disk is maintained at
20 N and is due entirely to the force component Bx
(i.e., Cx ϭ 0), and if the friction force F acting on the
disk is 60 percent of R, determine the components
of the couple M which must be applied to the handle
at C to hold the sander in position. Assume that half
of the weight is supported at C.

᭤3/96 The uniform rectangular panel ABCD has a mass of
40 kg and is hinged at its corners A and B to the
ﬁxed vertical surface. A wire from E to D keeps
edges BC and AD horizontal. Hinge A can support
thrust along the hinge axis AB, whereas hinge B
supports force normal to the hinge axis only. Find
the tension T in the wire and the magnitude B of
the force supported by hinge B.
1200 mm

B

C
30°
E

2400 mm

T

A
D
Problem 3/96

162

Chapter 3

Equilibrium

᭤3/97 The portable reel is used to wind up and store an air
hose. The tension in the hose is 100 N and a vertical
200-N force is applied to the handle in order to
steady the reel frame. Determine the minimum
force P which must be applied perpendicular to the
handle DE and the vertical components of the force
reactions at the feet A, B, and C. The diameter of
the coil of reeled hose is 300 mm, and the weight of
the loaded reel and its frame may be neglected. Note
that force P is perpendicular to OD. State any
assumptions.

᭤3/98 The vertical plane containing the utility cable turns
30Њ at the vertical pole OC. The tensions T1 and T2
are both 950 N. In order to prevent long-term leaning of the pole, guy wires AD and BE are utilized. If
the two guy wires are adjusted so as to carry equal
tensions T which together reduce the moment at O
to zero, determine the net horizontal reaction at O.
Determine the required value of T. Neglect the
weight of the pole.
z
10°

200 N
150

150

150

T2 = 950 N

30°

B

T1 = 950 N

A

125

100 N

10°
C

E

D

P

15°

375

O
O

y

B
C
A
500

525
OD = 300 mm

Dimensions in millimeters

30°

x

15°

E

D

OA = 9 m

OD = 8 m

OB = 11 m

OE = 10 m

OC = 13 m
Problem 3/97
Problem 3/98

Article 3/5

3/5 Chapter Review
In Chapter 3 we have applied our knowledge of the properties of
forces, moments, and couples studied in Chapter 2 to solve problems involving rigid bodies in equilibrium. Complete equilibrium of a body requires that the vector resultant of all forces acting on it be zero (ΣF ϭ 0)
and the vector resultant of all moments on the body about a point (or
axis) also be zero (ΣM ϭ 0). We are guided in all of our solutions by
these two requirements, which are easily comprehended physically.
Frequently, it is not the theory but its application which presents
difﬁculty. The crucial steps in applying our principles of equilibrium
should be quite familiar by now. They are:
1. Make an unequivocal decision as to which system (a body or collection of bodies) in equilibrium is to be analyzed.
2. Isolate the system in question from all contacting bodies by drawing
its free-body diagram showing all forces and couples acting on the
isolated system from external sources.
3. Observe the principle of action and reaction (Newton’s third law)
when assigning the sense of each force.
4. Label all forces and couples, known and unknown.
5. Choose and label reference axes, always choosing a right-handed set
when vector notation is used (which is usually the case for threedimensional analysis).
6. Check the adequacy of the constraints (supports) and match the
number of unknowns with the number of available independent
equations of equilibrium.
When solving an equilibrium problem, we should ﬁrst check to see
that the body is statically determinate. If there are more supports than
are necessary to hold the body in place, the body is statically indeterminate, and the equations of equilibrium by themselves will not enable us
to solve for all of the external reactions. In applying the equations of
equilibrium, we choose scalar algebra, vector algebra, or graphical
analysis according to both preference and experience; vector algebra is
particularly useful for many three-dimensional problems.
The algebra of a solution can be simpliﬁed by the choice of a moment axis which eliminates as many unknowns as possible or by the
choice of a direction for a force summation which avoids reference to
certain unknowns. A few moments of thought to take advantage of
these simpliﬁcations can save appreciable time and effort.
The principles and methods covered in Chapter 2 and 3 constitute
the most basic part of statics. They lay the foundation for what follows
not only in statics but in dynamics as well.

Chapter Review

163

164

Chapter 3

Equilibrium

REVIEW PROBLEMS
3/99

C

The pin at O can support a maximum force of 3.5
kN. What is the corresponding maximum load L
which can be applied to the angled bracket AOB?

1.5′
B

3′

B
L

A

A

250 mm

O

4′

Problem 3/101

60°

350 mm
Problem 3/99

3/100 The light bracket ABC is freely hinged at A and is
constrained by the ﬁxed pin in the smooth slot at
B. Calculate the magnitude R of the force supported by the pin at A under the action of the 80N ⅐ m applied couple.

3/102 The device shown in the ﬁgure is useful for lifting
drywall panels into position prior to fastening to
the stud wall. Estimate the magnitude P of the
force required to lift the 25-kg panel. State any assumptions.

25 kg

P

80 N·m

5°

150 mm
C

B
200 mm

C

A

45°

36 mm

B
90 mm

60 mm

A
Problem 3/102
Problem 3/100

3/101 The uniform bar with end rollers weighs 60 lb and
is supported by the horizontal and vertical surfaces and by the wire AC. Calculate the tension T
in the wire and the reactions against the rollers at
A and at B.

3/103 The tool shown is used for straightening twisted
members as wooden framing is completed. If the
force P ϭ 30 lb is applied to the handle as shown,
determine the normal forces applied to the installed stud at points A and B. Ignore friction.
3.35″

14.5″
A

1.8″
B
P
Problem 3/103

Article 3/5
3/104 Determine a general expression for the normal
force NA exerted by the smooth vertical wall on the
uniform slender bar of mass m and length L. The
mass of the cylinder is m1, and all bearings are
ideal. Determine the value of m1 which makes (a)
NA ϭ mg /2 and (b) NA ϭ 0.

Review Problems

165

3/106 If the weight of the boom is negligible compared
with the applied 30-kN load, determine the cable
tensions T1 and T2 and the force acting at the ball
joint at A.

C
D

C

x

A m
B
L
––
3

3m

y
30°
30°

T1

4m
E

2L
––
3

A

4m
2m

3m

m1

O

B

T2
Problem 3/104

z

D
30 kN

3/105 The gear reducer shown is acted on by the two couples and its weight of 200 N. To design adequate
mounts, determine the vertical force supported by
each of the reducer mountings at A and B.
120 N·m
80 N·m

Problem 3/106

3/107 The power unit of the post-hole digger supplies a
torque of 4000 lb-in. to the auger. The arm B is
free to slide in the supporting sleeve C but is not
free to rotate about the horizontal axis of C. If the
unit is free to swivel about the vertical axis of
the mount D, determine the force exerted against
the right rear wheel by the block A (or AЈ), which
prevents the unbraked truck from rolling. (Hint:
View the system from above.)
8′

200 mm

30°

150 mm

A

B

B
200 N
Problem 3/105

A
C
D

5′

30°
A′
A
Problem 3/107

166

Chapter 3

Equilibrium

3/108 The curved arm BC and attached cables AB and
AC support a power line which lies in the vertical
y-z plane. The tangents to the power line at the insulator below A make 15Њ angles with the horizontal y-axis. If the tension in the power line at the
insulator is 1.3 kN, calculate the total force supported by the bolt at D on the pole bracket. The
weight of the arm BC can be neglected compared
with the other forces, and it can be assumed that
the bolt at E supports horizontal force only.

C

B

C

B
500 N

120 mm

B

C

45°

A

z

500 N

1.2 m
1.2 m
D, E

B

100
mm

200 mm

Problem 3/109

45Њ
45Њ C

3/110 A large symmetrical drum for drying sand is operated by the geared motor drive shown. If the mass
of the sand is 750 kg and an average gear-tooth
force of 2.6 kN is supplied by the motor pinion A to
the drum gear normal to the contacting surfaces at
B, calculate the average offset x of the center of
mass G of the sand from the vertical centerline.
Neglect all friction in the supporting rollers.

y

A
x

600 mm
Detail of contact
at B
B
160 mm
D
160 mm

20°

E
B

O
_
x

A
600 mm

Detail of arm attachment
Problem 3/108

3/109 The pulley bracket is secured to its foundation by
two bolts B and two bolts C with an initial tension
in each of the four bolts prior to application of the
500-N tension in the cable. Determine the increase
⌬T in tension in each of the bolts C and the increase ⌬F in force under each side of the bracket
at B resulting from application of the cable tension. Assume that the bolt holes are oversized with
all horizontal force supported by the small ledge at
A. Also assume that the vertical reactions on the
base are concentrated at the centerlines of the
bolts. These assumptions would be typical design
considerations.

G

150 mm

Problem 3/110

Article 3/5
3/111 Each of the three uniform 1200-mm bars has a
mass of 20 kg. The bars are welded together into
the conﬁguration shown and suspended by three
vertical wires. Bars AB and BC lie in the horizontal x-y plane, and the third bar lies in a plane parallel to the x-z plane. Compute the tension in each
wire.
z

1200 mm

B

Review Problems

3/113 A type of small, adjustable doorstop which ﬁts onto
hinge pins is shown in the ﬁgure. The door is
shown closed in the regular view and open 90Њ in
the enlarged view of the doorstop. If a person pulls
on the doorknob with a 1-lb force P which is perpendicular to the door when it is in the 90Њ open
position, determine the force FA which the bumper
A exerts on the wall. Treat this problem as twodimensional.

600 mm

O

A

"
27

C
600 mm

x

167

y

"
1.1

P

30°
1200 mm

O

A

"
1.7

Problem 3/111

3/112 Determine the tension T required to hold the rectangular solid in the position shown. The 125-kg
rectangular solid is homogeneous. Friction at D is
negligible.
Problem 3/113
0.5 m
C

0.3 m
0.4 m
A
D

0.4 m

B

3/114 Three identical steel balls, each of mass m, are
placed in the cylindrical ring which rests on a horizontal surface and whose height is slightly greater
than the radius of the balls. The diameter of the
ring is such that the balls are virtually touching
one another. A fourth identical ball is then placed
on top of the three balls. Determine the force P exerted by the ring on each of the three lower balls.

y

0.125 m
T
z

x

Problem 3/112

Problem 3/114

168

Chapter 3

Equilibrium

3/115 A vertical force P on the foot pedal of the bell
crank is required to produce a tension T of 400 N
in the vertical control rod. Determine the corresponding bearing reactions at A and B.
60 mm
120 mm

z

*Computer-Oriented Problems
* 3/117 Determine and plot the tension ratio T/mg required to hold the uniform slender bar in equilibrium for any angle ␪ from just above zero to just
under 45Њ. The bar AB of mass m is uniform.

y
100
mm

A

T

C

30°
100
mm

P

B

B

30°

m

x

␪

A

15°

200 mm
T = 400 N

Problem 3/117
Problem 3/115

᭤3/116 We will see when we study friction in Chapter 6
that a very large force T can be required to raise
the 10-kg body when the cable is wound around a
ﬁxed rough cylinder as shown. For the static-equilibrium values shown, determine the force and moment reactions at point O. The 0.3-m dimension
refers to the point A where the cable loses contact
with the cylinder. Neglect the weight of the ﬁxed
cylinder.

* 3/118 Determine and plot as a function of ␪ the tension T
which must be produced by the winch in order to
steadily rotate the structural member about the
ﬁxed pivot at O. Use the range 0 Յ ␪ Յ ␪max, where
␪max is the value of ␪ at which T goes to zero. The
structural member has a mass of 35 kg per meter
of its length.
A
B

4m

T = 30 kN

60°

x

2m
θ

C
O

30°
20°

O
A
y

2m
30 mm

0.8 m

z

0.3 m
10 kg

Problem 3/116

Problem 3/118

Article 3/5
* 3/119 The jib crane is designed for a maximum capacity
of 10 kN, and its uniform I-beam has a mass of 200
kg. (a) Plot the magnitude R of the force on the pin
at A as a function of x through its operating range
of x ϭ 0.2 m to x ϭ 3.8 m. On the same set of axes,
plot the x- and y-components of the pin reaction at
A. (b) Determine the minimum value of R and the
corresponding value of x. (c) For what value of R
should the pin at A be designed? (Use g ϭ 10 m/s2.)

Review Problems

169

* 3/121 Two trafﬁc signals are attached to the 36-ft support cable at equal intervals as shown. Determine
the equilibrium conﬁguration angles ␣, ␤, and ␥, as
well as the tension in each cable segment
35′
A

α
12′

B

D

12′

12′

100 lb

y

γ

β

C

200 lb

Problem 3/121
A

30°

x
x
10 kN

* 3/122 The two trafﬁc signals of Prob. 3/121 are now repositioned so that segment BC of the 36-ft support
cable is 10 ft in length and is horizontal. Specify
the necessary lengths AB and CD and the tensions
in all three cable segments.

3m

1m

35′
Problem 3/119

x
B
C

50 kg
Problem 3/120

C

B
10′

100 lb
Problem 3/122

10 m

A

D

A

* 3/120 The 50-kg cylinder is suspended from a clamping
collar at C which can be positioned at any horizontal position x between the ﬁxed supports at A and
B. The cable is 11 m in length. Determine and plot
the tensions in cable segments AC and BC as functions of x over the interval 0 Յ x Յ 10 m. What is
the maximum value of each tension and for what
value of x does it occur?

200 lb

170

Chapter 3

Equilibrium

* 3/123 The mass center of the 1.5-kg link OC is located at
G, and the spring of constant k ϭ 25 N/m is unstretched when ␪ ϭ 0. Plot the tension T required
for static equilibrium over the range 0 Յ ␪ Յ 90Њ
and state the values of T for ␪ ϭ 45Њ and ␪ ϭ 90Њ.

12″

4″

B
18″
C
H

T

32″

G1

I

24″

D
F

A

θ

D

E

O
G2

O

G

12″
34″

B
θ

Problem 3/124

k

A

C

OG = 160 mm
OB = BC = 240 mm

* 3/125 The system of Prob. 3/112 is shown again here,
only now the 125-kg homogeneous rectangular
solid is depicted as having rotated an angle ␪ about
the hinge axis AB. Determine and plot the following quantities as functions of ␪ over the range
0 Յ ␪ Յ 60Њ: T, Ay, Az, Bx, By, and Bz. The hinge at
A cannot exert an axial thrust. Assume all hinge
force components to be in the positive coordinate
directions.

Problem 3/123

* 3/124 The basic features of a small backhoe are shown in
the illustration. Member BE (complete with hydraulic cylinder CD and bucket-control links DF
and DE) weighs 500 lb with mass center at G1. The
bucket and its load of clay weigh 350 lb with mass
center at G2. To disclose the operational design
characteristics of the backhoe, determine and plot
the force T in the hydraulic cylinder AB as a function of the angular position ␪ of member BE over
the range 0 Յ ␪ Յ 90Њ. For what value of ␪ is the
force T equal to zero? Member OH is ﬁxed for this
exercise; note that its controlling hydraulic cylinder (hidden) extends from near point O to pin I.
Similarly, the bucket-control hydraulic cylinder
CD is held at a ﬁxed length.

0.5 m
0.4 m
0.3 m
C

θ

0.4 m
A
0.125 m

D

B

T
Problem 3/125

y
x
z

Article 3/5
* 3/126 The vertical pole, utility cable, and two guy wires
from Prob. 3/98 are shown again here. As part of a
design study, the following conditions are considered. The tension T2 is a constant 1000 N, and its
10Њ angle is ﬁxed. The 10Њ angle for T1 is also ﬁxed,
but the magnitude of T1 is allowed to vary from 0
to 2000 N. For each value of T1, determine and
plot the magnitude of the equal tensions T in cables AD and BE and the angle ␪ for which the moment at O will be zero. State the values of T and ␪
for T1 ϭ 1000 N.
z
10°

10°
C

T2

B

T1

A

O

30°
y

x

␪

E

D

OA = 9 m

OD = 8 m

OB = 11 m

OE = 10 m

OC = 13 m
Problem 3/126

Review Problems

171

This view of Sydney Harbour shows a variety of structures. In all cases, the engineers had to calculate the
force supported by each major component of the overall structure.
© Yann Guichaoua/SuperStock

4

Structures
CHAPTER OUTLINE
4/1 Introduction

4/5 Space Trusses

4/2 Plane Trusses

4/6 Frames and Machines

4/3 Method of Joints

4/7 Chapter Review

4/4 Method of Sections

4/1

Introduction

In Chapter 3 we studied the equilibrium of a single rigid body or a
system of connected members treated as a single rigid body. We first
drew a free-body diagram of the body showing all forces external to
the isolated body and then we applied the force and moment equations of equilibrium. In Chapter 4 we focus on the determination of
the forces internal to a structure—that is, forces of action and reaction
between the connected members. An engineering structure is any
connected system of members built to support or transfer forces and
to safely withstand the loads applied to it. To determine the forces internal to an engineering structure, we must dismember the structure
and analyze separate free-body diagrams of individual members or
combinations of members. This analysis requires careful application
of Newton’s third law, which states that each action is accompanied
by an equal and opposite reaction.
In Chapter 4 we analyze the internal forces acting in several types
of structures—namely, trusses, frames, and machines. In this treatment
we consider only statically determinate structures, which do not have
more supporting constraints than are necessary to maintain an equilibrium conﬁguration. Thus, as we have already seen, the equations of
equilibrium are adequate to determine all unknown reactions.
The analysis of trusses, frames and machines, and beams under
concentrated loads constitutes a straightforward application of the material developed in the previous two chapters. The basic procedure developed in Chapter 3 for isolating a body by constructing a correct
free-body diagram is essential for the analysis of statically determinate
structures.
173

174

Chapter 4

Structures

Stringer
Cross beam
L
L
L
L
L
L

Figure 4/1

Pratt

Howe

Warren

K

Baltimore
Commonly Used Bridge Trusses

Fink

Pratt

Howe

Warren
Commonly Used Roof Trusses

Figure 4/2

Article 4/2

4/2

Plane Trusses

175

B

A framework composed of members joined at their ends to form a
rigid structure is called a truss. Bridges, roof supports, derricks, and
other such structures are common examples of trusses. Structural members commonly used are I-beams, channels, angles, bars, and special
shapes which are fastened together at their ends by welding, riveted
connections, or large bolts or pins. When the members of the truss lie
essentially in a single plane, the truss is called a plane truss.
For bridges and similar structures, plane trusses are commonly utilized in pairs with one truss assembly placed on each side of the structure. A section of a typical bridge structure is shown in Fig. 4/1. The
combined weight of the roadway and vehicles is transferred to the longitudinal stringers, then to the cross beams, and ﬁnally, with the weights
of the stringers and cross beams accounted for, to the upper joints of the
two plane trusses which form the vertical sides of the structure. A simpliﬁed model of the truss structure is indicated at the left side of the illustration; the forces L represent the joint loadings.
Several examples of commonly used trusses which can be analyzed
as plane trusses are shown in Fig. 4/2.

Simple Trusses
The basic element of a plane truss is the triangle. Three bars joined
by pins at their ends, Fig. 4/3a, constitute a rigid frame. The term rigid
is used to mean noncollapsible and also to mean that deformation of the
members due to induced internal strains is negligible. On the other
hand, four or more bars pin-jointed to form a polygon of as many sides
constitute a nonrigid frame. We can make the nonrigid frame in Fig.
4/3b rigid, or stable, by adding a diagonal bar joining A and D or B and C
and thereby forming two triangles. We can extend the structure by
adding additional units of two end-connected bars, such as DE and CE
or AF and DF, Fig. 4/3c, which are pinned to two ﬁxed joints. In this
way the entire structure will remain rigid.
Structures built from a basic triangle in the manner described are
known as simple trusses. When more members are present than are
needed to prevent collapse, the truss is statically indeterminate. A statically indeterminate truss cannot be analyzed by the equations of equilibrium alone. Additional members or supports which are not necessary
for maintaining the equilibrium conﬁguration are called redundant.
To design a truss we must ﬁrst determine the forces in the various
members and then select appropriate sizes and structural shapes to
withstand the forces. Several assumptions are made in the force analysis of simple trusses. First, we assume all members to be two-force members. A two-force member is one in equilibrium under the action of two
forces only, as deﬁned in general terms with Fig. 3/4 in Art. 3/3. Each
member of a truss is normally a straight link joining the two points of
application of force. The two forces are applied at the ends of the member and are necessarily equal, opposite, and collinear for equilibrium.
The member may be in tension or compression, as shown in Fig.
4/4. When we represent the equilibrium of a portion of a two-force member, the tension T or compression C acting on the cut section is the same

Plane Trusses

A

C
(a)

D
B

A

C
(b)

F

D
B
E

A

C
(c)

Figure 4/3
T
C
T
C

C
T
T
Tension

Compression

Two-Force Members

Figure 4/4

C

176

Chapter 4

Structures

for all sections. We assume here that the weight of the member is small
compared with the force it supports. If it is not, or if we must account
for the small effect of the weight, we can replace the weight W of the
member by two forces, each W/2 if the member is uniform, with one
force acting at each end of the member. These forces, in effect, are
treated as loads externally applied to the pin connections. Accounting
for the weight of a member in this way gives the correct result for the
average tension or compression along the member but will not account
for the effect of bending of the member.

Truss Connections and Supports
When welded or riveted connections are used to join structural
members, we may usually assume that the connection is a pin joint if
the centerlines of the members are concurrent at the joint as in Fig. 4/5.
We also assume in the analysis of simple trusses that all external
forces are applied at the pin connections. This condition is satisﬁed in
most trusses. In bridge trusses the deck is usually laid on cross beams
which are supported at the joints, as shown in Fig. 4/1.
For large trusses, a roller, rocker, or some kind of slip joint is used
at one of the supports to provide for expansion and contraction due to
temperature changes and for deformation from applied loads. Trusses
and frames in which no such provision is made are statically indeterminate, as explained in Art. 3/3. Figure 3/1 shows examples of such joints.
Two methods for the force analysis of simple trusses will be given.
Each method will be explained for the simple truss shown in Fig. 4/6a.
The free-body diagram of the truss as a whole is shown in Fig. 4/6b. The
external reactions are usually determined ﬁrst, by applying the equilibrium equations to the truss as a whole. Then the force analysis of the remainder of the truss is performed.

Figure 4/5

F

E

A

D
B

C
L
(a)

4/3
R1

L

R2
(b)

Figure 4/6

y

Compression
AF
x

AB
Tension
R1

Figure 4/7

Method of Joints

This method for ﬁnding the forces in the members of a truss consists of satisfying the conditions of equilibrium for the forces acting on
the connecting pin of each joint. The method therefore deals with the
equilibrium of concurrent forces, and only two independent equilibrium
equations are involved.
We begin the analysis with any joint where at least one known load
exists and where not more than two unknown forces are present. The
solution may be started with the pin at the left end. Its free-body diagram is shown in Fig. 4/7. With the joints indicated by letters, we usually designate the force in each member by the two letters deﬁning the
ends of the member. The proper directions of the forces should be evident by inspection for this simple case. The free-body diagrams of portions of members AF and AB are also shown to clearly indicate the
mechanism of the action and reaction. The member AB actually makes
contact on the left side of the pin, although the force AB is drawn from
the right side and is shown acting away from the pin. Thus, if we consistently draw the force arrows on the same side of the pin as the member,
then tension (such as AB) will always be indicated by an arrow away

Article 4/3

Method of Joints

177

1

2

AF

EF

BF

AF

AB

EF

AF

R1
BF

AF

Joint F

AB
4

CE = 0

R1
BC

Joint A

CD
Joint C

3

BF

BC

BE

5

EF

BE

BE

DE

DE

AB

BC

L

EF

BE
Joint E

BF
6

DE

AB

CD

CD
L
Joint B

R2

DE

R2
Joint D
F

E
y

A
R1

B

C
L

D
R2

Figure 4/8

© Stephen Wilkes/The Image Bank/Getty Images

from the pin, and compression (such as AF) will always be indicated by
an arrow toward the pin. The magnitude of AF is obtained from the
equation ΣFy ϭ 0 and AB is then found from ΣFx ϭ 0.
Joint F may be analyzed next, since it now contains only two unknowns, EF and BF. Proceeding to the next joint having no more than
two unknowns, we subsequently analyze joints B, C, E, and D in that
order. Figure 4/8 shows the free-body diagram of each joint and its corresponding force polygon, which represents graphically the two equilibrium conditions ΣFx ϭ 0 and ΣFy ϭ 0. The numbers indicate the order in
which the joints are analyzed. We note that, when joint D is ﬁnally
reached, the computed reaction R2 must be in equilibrium with the
forces in members CD and ED, which were determined previously from
the two neighboring joints. This requirement provides a check on the
correctness of our work. Note that isolation of joint C shows that the
force in CE is zero when the equation ΣFy ϭ 0 is applied. The force in

x

This New York City bridge structure
suggests that members of a simple
truss need not be straight.

178

Chapter 4

Structures

© Steve Shepard/Stockphoto

this member would not be zero, of course, if an external vertical load
were applied at C.
It is often convenient to indicate the tension T and compression C of
the various members directly on the original truss diagram by drawing
arrows away from the pins for tension and toward the pins for compression. This designation is illustrated at the bottom of Fig. 4/8.
Sometimes we cannot initially assign the correct direction of one or
both of the unknown forces acting on a given pin. If so, we may make an
arbitrary assignment. A negative computed force value indicates that
the initially assumed direction is incorrect.

The New River Gorge Bridge in West
Virginia is the longest arch bridge in
the United States.

Internal and External Redundancy
If a plane truss has more external supports than are necessary to
ensure a stable equilibrium conﬁguration, the truss as a whole is statically indeterminate, and the extra supports constitute external redundancy. If a truss has more internal members than are necessary to
prevent collapse when the truss is removed from its supports, then the
extra members constitute internal redundancy and the truss is again
statically indeterminate.
For a truss which is statically determinate externally, there is a definite relation between the number of its members and the number of its
joints necessary for internal stability without redundancy. Because we
can specify the equilibrium of each joint by two scalar force equations,
there are in all 2j such equations for a truss with j joints. For the entire
truss composed of m two-force members and having the maximum of
three unknown support reactions, there are in all m ϩ 3 unknowns (m
tension or compression forces and three reactions). Thus, for any plane
truss, the equation m ϩ 3 ϭ 2j will be satisﬁed if the truss is statically
determinate internally.
A simple plane truss, formed by starting with a triangle and adding
two new members to locate each new joint with respect to the existing
structure, satisﬁes the relation automatically. The condition holds for
the initial triangle, where m ϭ j ϭ 3, and m increases by 2 for each
added joint while j increases by 1. Some other (nonsimple) statically determinate trusses, such as the K-truss in Fig. 4/2, are arranged differently, but can be seen to satisfy the same relation.
This equation is a necessary condition for stability but it is not a
sufﬁcient condition, since one or more of the m members can be
arranged in such a way as not to contribute to a stable conﬁguration of
the entire truss. If m ϩ 3 Ͼ 2j, there are more members than independent equations, and the truss is statically indeterminate internally
with redundant members present. If m ϩ 3 Ͻ 2j, there is a deficiency
of internal members, and the truss is unstable and will collapse under
load.
Special Conditions
We often encounter several special conditions in the analysis
of trusses. When two collinear members are under compression, as indicated in Fig. 4/9a, it is necessary to add a third member to maintain

Article 4/3

x
F3
y

F1
F2

θ

x

179

F1

F3

x′

Method of Joints

ΣFx = 0 requires F1 = F2
Σ Fx ′ = 0 requires F3 = F4

Σ Fx = 0 requires F1 = 0
Σ Fx ′ = 0 requires F2 = 0

x′
x

F1

ΣFy = 0 requires F3 = 0
ΣFx = 0 requires F1 = F2
(a)

F2

F4

F2

(b)

(c)

Figure 4/9

alignment of the two members and prevent buckling. We see from a
force summation in the y-direction that the force F3 in the third member must be zero and from the x-direction that F1 ϭ F2. This conclusion
holds regardless of the angle ␪ and holds also if the collinear members
are in tension. If an external force with a component in the y-direction
were applied to the joint, then F3 would no longer be zero.
When two noncollinear members are joined as shown in Fig. 4/9b,
then in the absence of an externally applied load at this joint, the
forces in both members must be zero, as we can see from the two force
summations.
When two pairs of collinear members are joined as shown in Fig.
4/9c, the forces in each pair must be equal and opposite. This conclusion
follows from the force summations indicated in the ﬁgure.
Truss panels are frequently cross-braced as shown in Fig. 4/10a.
Such a panel is statically indeterminate if each brace can support either tension or compression. However, when the braces are flexible
members incapable of supporting compression, as are cables, then only
the tension member acts and we can disregard the other member. It is
usually evident from the asymmetry of the loading how the panel will
deflect. If the deflection is as indicated in Fig. 4/10b, then member AB
should be retained and CD disregarded. When this choice cannot be
made by inspection, we may arbitrarily select the member to be retained. If the assumed tension turns out to be positive upon calculation, then the choice was correct. If the assumed tension force turns
out to be negative, then the opposite member must be retained and
the calculation redone.
We can avoid simultaneous solution of the equilibrium equations for
two unknown forces at a joint by a careful choice of reference axes.
Thus, for the joint indicated schematically in Fig. 4/11 where L is known
and F1 and F2 are unknown, a force summation in the x-direction eliminates reference to F1 and a force summation in the xЈ-direction eliminates reference to F2. When the angles involved are not easily found,
then a simultaneous solution of the equations using one set of reference
directions for both unknowns may be preferable.

D

B

A

D

C

B

A

(a)

C
(b)

Figure 4/10

x

x′

L

F2

F1

Figure 4/11

180

Chapter 4

Structures

SAMPLE PROBLEM 4/1
Compute the force in each member of the loaded cantilever truss by the
method of joints.

B

5m

If it were not desired to calculate the external reactions at D and E,
the analysis for a cantilever truss could begin with the joint at the loaded end.
However, this truss will be analyzed completely, so the ﬁrst step will be to compute the external forces at D and E from the free-body diagram of the truss as a
whole. The equations of equilibrium give

D

5m

5m

5m

5m

Solution.

[ΣME ϭ 0]

5T Ϫ 20(5) Ϫ 30(10) ϭ 0
80 cos 30Њ Ϫ Ex ϭ 0
80 sin 30Њ ϩ Ey Ϫ 20 Ϫ 30 ϭ 0

C

30 kN

5m

E

20 kN

Ex ϭ 69.3 kN

[ΣFy ϭ 0]

5m

T ϭ 80 kN

[ΣFx ϭ 0]

A

Ey ϭ 10 kN

T
5m
y

5m

Next we draw free-body diagrams showing the forces acting on each of the
connecting pins. The correctness of the assigned directions of the forces is veriﬁed when each joint is considered in sequence. There should be no question
about the correct direction of the forces on joint A. Equilibrium requires

x
5m

0.866AB Ϫ 30 ϭ 0

AB ϭ 34.6 kN T

AC Ϫ 0.5(34.6) ϭ 0

AC ϭ 17.32 kN C

Ans.

20 kN

Ey

Ans.

[ΣFx ϭ 0]

Ex
5m

30 kN

[ΣFy ϭ 0]

30°
60°

ᕡ where T stands for tension and C stands for compression.

y
AB

Joint B must be analyzed next, since there are more than two unknown
forces on joint C. The force BC must provide an upward component, in which
case BD must balance the force to the left. Again the forces are obtained from
[ΣFy ϭ 0]

0.866BC Ϫ 0.866(34.6) ϭ 0

BC ϭ 34.6 kN C

BD Ϫ 2(0.5)(34.6) ϭ 0

BD ϭ 34.6 kN T

Ans.

x

AC

Ans.

[ΣFx ϭ 0]

60°

Joint C now contains only two unknowns, and these are found in the same
way as before:
[ΣFy ϭ 0]

[ΣFx ϭ 0]

Ans.

CE Ϫ 17.32 Ϫ 0.5(34.6) Ϫ 0.5(57.7) ϭ 0
CE ϭ 63.5 kN C

Ans.

Finally, from joint E there results
[ΣFy ϭ 0]

0.866DE ϭ 10

DE ϭ 11.55 kN C

30 kN
Joint A

Joint B

Helpful Hint

ᕡ It should be stressed that the ten-

0.866CD Ϫ 0.866(34.6) Ϫ 20 ϭ 0
CD ϭ 57.7 kN T

BD
AB =
60°
34.6 kN 60°
BC

Ans.

and the equation ΣFx ϭ 0 checks.
Note that the weights of the truss members have been neglected in comparison with the external loads.

sion/compression designation refers
to the member, not the joint. Note
that we draw the force arrow on the
same side of the joint as the member
which exerts the force. In this way
tension (arrow away from the joint)
is distinguished from compression
(arrow toward the joint).
BC =
34.6 kN
DE

CD
60°

60°

AC =
17.32 kN

CE
20 kN

Joint C

60°

69.3 kN

CE =
63.5 kN
10 kN
Joint E

Article 4/3

Method of Joints

SAMPLE PROBLEM 4/2

181

A
B

The simple truss shown supports the two loads, each of magnitude L. Determine the forces in members DE, DF, DG, and CD.

C
2R

First of all, we note that the curved members of this simple truss
are all two-force members, so that the effect of each curved member within the
truss is the same as that of a straight member.
We can begin with joint E because there are only two unknown member
forces acting there. With reference to the free-body diagram and accompanying
geometry for joint E, we note that ␤ ϭ 180Њ Ϫ 11.25Њ Ϫ 90Њ ϭ 78.8Њ.

H

Solution.

ᕡ [ΣFy ϭ 0]

DE sin 78.8Њ Ϫ L ϭ 0

[ΣFx ϭ 0]

EF Ϫ DE cos 78.8Њ ϭ 0

DE ϭ 1.020L T

R αα

΄

α
α

O

E

F

α = 22.5°

L

L

Ans.
DE

EF ϭ 0.1989L C

11.25°
y

We must now move to joint F, as there are still three unknown members at joint
D. From the geometric diagram,
␥ ϭ tanϪ1

D
G

D
11.25°

β

΅

x

EF

2R sin 22.5Њ
ϭ 42.1Њ
2R cos 22.5Њ Ϫ R

β

O

E

11.25°
OD = OE = 2R
L

From the free-body diagram of joint F,

Joint E

[ΣFx ϭ 0]

ϪGF cos 67.5Њ ϩ DF cos 42.1Њ Ϫ 0.1989L ϭ 0

[ΣFy ϭ 0]

GF sin 67.5Њ ϩ DF sin 42.1Њ Ϫ L ϭ 0

Helpful Hint

Simultaneous solution of these two equations yields
GF ϭ 0.646L T

ᕡ Rather than calculate and use the

DF ϭ 0.601L T

angle ␤ ϭ 78.8Њ in the force equations, we could have used the 11.25Њ
angle directly.

Ans.

For member DG, we move to the free-body diagram of joint D and the accompanying geometry.
␦ ϭ tanϪ1

΄2R cos 22.5Њ Ϫ 2R cos 45Њ΅ ϭ 33.8Њ
2R sin 45Њ Ϫ 2R sin 22.5Њ

⑀ ϭ tanϪ1

GF
DF
D

2R sin 22.5Њ Ϫ R sin
΄2R cos 22.5Њ Ϫ R cos 45Њ΅ ϭ 2.92Њ
45Њ

γ

67.5°

22.5°

0.1989L

2R
γ

O

F

Then from joint D:

E

OF = FE = R
L

[ΣFx ϭ 0] ϪDG cos 2.92Њ Ϫ CD sin 33.8Њ Ϫ 0.601L sin 47.9Њ ϩ 1.020L cos 78.8Њ ϭ 0

Joint F

[ΣFy ϭ 0] ϪDG sin 2.92Њ ϩ CD cos 33.8Њ Ϫ 0.601L cos 47.9Њ Ϫ 1.020L sin 78.8Њ ϭ 0

The simultaneous solution is
CD ϭ 1.617L T

DG ϭ Ϫ1.147L or DG ϭ 1.147L C

CD

C

Ans.

Note that ⑀ is shown exaggerated in the accompanying ﬁgures.

δ

δ

⑀

β

DG

⑀

22.5°
O

47.9°
DF = 0.601L

hor.

DE = 1.020L

Joint D

D
G

2R

22.5°
OG = CG = R

182

Chapter 4

Structures
4/4 Determine the force in each member of the truss. Note
the presence of any zero-force members.

PROBLEMS
Introductory Problems

5 kN

4/1 Determine the force in each member of the loaded
truss.

A

3m

B

12 m
1m

B

A
5m

C

C

2m

D

Problem 4/4

100 kg

4/5 Calculate the forces in members AC, AD, and DE for
the loaded truss. Restraining link BC is horizontal.

Problem 4/1

4/2 Determine the force in each member of the loaded
truss.

B

C

3′

A

3′

30°

D

A
3′
B
60°

E

C
600 lb
Problem 4/5
400 kg

4/6 Calculate the force in each member of the loaded
truss.

Problem 4/2

E

4/3 Determine the force in each member of the loaded
truss.

D

A
60°

2 kN

3m

45°
A

3m

3m
B

B
Problem 4/6
15°
C

W

Problem 4/3

C

Article 4/3
4/7 Determine the force in each member of the loaded
truss. Make use of the symmetry of the truss and of
the loading.

Problems

183

4/10 Calculate the force in each member of the loaded
truss.
12′

B

C

A

D

B

4m
A

5m

5m

5m

E

5m

H

G

F

30 kN

60 kN

C

30 kN

90°

12′
E

1000 lb
Problem 4/7
F

4/8 Determine the force in each member of the loaded
truss.

D
Problem 4/10

4/11 Determine the forces in members AB, BC, and BD
of the loaded truss.

A
2m

D
4m

L

B

D

3m

R
A

C

C
B
5 kN

Problem 4/11

15°

Problem 4/8

Representative Problems

4/9 Determine the force in each member of the loaded
truss.

4/12 Determine the force in each member of the loaded
truss. All triangles are isosceles.

A

A
30°
10 kN
4m
30°

B

30°

B

C
30°

E

E
3 kN
4m

C

D
Problem 4/9

D

16 kN
3m

Problem 4/12

184

Chapter 4

Structures

4/13 Each member of the truss is a uniform 20-ft bar
weighing 400 lb. Calculate the average tension or
compression in each member due to the weights of
the members.
E

4/16 The rectangular frame is composed of four perimeter two-force members and two cables AC and BD
which are incapable of supporting compression.
Determine the forces in all members due to the load
L in position (a) and then in position (b).

D
L
(a)

3d

A

B
60°

A

60°

60°

60°

B

20′

C

20′
4d

Problem 4/13

4/14 Determine the force in each member of the loaded
truss. All triangles are equilateral.
C
8 kN

D
(b)
C

A

L

B
Problem 4/16

4/17 Determine the force in each member of the truss.
B
E

D

4 kN

2 kN

30°

A

30°

Problem 4/14

4/15 A drawbridge is being raised by a cable EI. The four
joint loadings shown result from the weight of the
roadway. Determine the forces in members EF, DE,
DF, CD, and FG.

10′
10′

50°

2 kN
Problem 4/17

4/18 The equiangular truss is loaded and supported as
shown. Determine the forces in all members in terms
of the horizontal load L.

I

10′

E
8′

F

C

60°

D

A

L

G
a

D

H

a

C

A

20°

2 kips

B

B

F

4 kips
a

4 kips
2 kips
C
Problem 4/15

a
a

a
D
Problem 4/18

E

Article 4/3
4/19 Calculate the forces in members AB, BH, and BG.
Members BF and CG are cables which can support
tension only.
4 kN

Problems

185

4/22 The loading of Prob. 4/21 is shown applied to a Howe
roof truss. Neglect any horizontal reactions at the
supports and solve for the forces in all members.
Compare with the results of Prob. 4/21.

6 kN
1 kN

A

B

3m
60°

D
C 3m
60°
60°

3m

60°

1 kN
1 kN

G

H

A

E

F

B

2m

1 kN

C

H

2m

2m

G

1 kN

D

2m

2m

F

E

Problem 4/19
Problem 4/22

4/20 Calculate the forces in members CF, CG, and EF of
the loaded truss.
2000 lb

10′

E

D
10′
2000 lb

13′

F

C

4/23 A small Ferris wheel is constructed of two identical trusses, one of which is shown. Member AO is
temporarily removed for replacement. If the
weight of the chairs and structural members
results in a 100-lb load at each joint of the truss
shown, determine the force in each member of the
structure. With member AO replaced, could you
repeat the analysis?

10′
16′

G

B
E
10′
F

H

D

A
26′
20′ each

G

Problem 4/20

4/21 A snow load transfers the forces shown to the upper
joints of a Pratt roof truss. Neglect any horizontal
reactions at the supports and solve for the forces in
all members.

O

C

B

H
A

1 kN
100-lb vertical force on each joint
1 kN

1 kN

C

Problem 4/23
1 kN
A

B

2m

H

D

2m
2m

G

2m

Problem 4/21

1 kN

F

2m

E

186

Chapter 4

Structures

4/24 Analysis of the wind acting on a small Hawaiian
church, which withstood the 165-mi/hr winds of
Hurricane Iniki in 1992, showed the forces transmitted to each roof truss panel to be as shown.
Treat the structure as a symmetrical simple truss
and neglect any horizontal component of the support reaction at A. Identify the truss member which
supports the largest force, tension or compression,
and calculate this force.

4/26 The 240-ft structure is used to provide various support services to launch vehicles prior to liftoff. In a
test, a 10-ton weight is suspended from joints F and
G, with its weight equally divided between the two
joints. Determine the forces in members GJ and GI.
What would be your path of joint analysis for members in the vertical tower, such as AB or KL?
6 sections
at 15′

K

10′
I J

2450 lb

10′
D

L
12 sections at 20′

7000 lb
C

E
16′

HG

F
4550 lb

F

10 tons

B

A

6000 lb

B
A

24′
Problem 4/24

C

B

D
2m

Problem 4/26

᭤4/27 Determine the force in member CG of the loaded
truss. Assume that the four external reactions at A,
B, E, and F are equal in magnitude and are directed
perpendicular to the local supporting surface.

E

L

L

2m

2m

G

D
E

40′

4/25 Determine the force in each member of the loaded
truss.

2m

C

F

D

C
500 kg

E

B
4m

H

G

A

F

15° 15°

A
30°

30°

Problem 4/25

Problem 4/27

3R
––
4

R

Article 4/3
᭤ 4/28 The tower for a transmission line is modeled by the
truss shown. The crossed members in the center
sections of the truss may be assumed to be capable
of supporting tension only. For the loads of 1.8 kN
applied in the vertical plane, compute the forces
induced in members AB, DB, and CD.

I

H

J

E

D

B

G

3 m 15°

F

1.8 kN

C
15°

K

1.8 kN

3m

5m

Problem 4/28

᭤ 4/29 Find the forces in members EF, KL, and GL for the
Fink truss shown.
10 kN
20 kN
E

20 kN
F

A

20 kN

G

C
N

B

L

30°
O

M

10 kN

H

30°
P

4m
E
L

4m

K

6 panels at 5 m
Problem 4/29

J

I

4m

F

C

G
K
H

J

N
L

L

L

L
Arc of radius 16 m
Arc of radius 18 m
Problem 4/30

L

D

4m
D

A

3m

4m

4m

B

A

187

᭤ 4/30 Determine the force in member CM of the loaded
truss.

M

5 panels at 3 m

Problems

L

I

188

Chapter 4

Structures

4/4

Method of Sections

When analyzing plane trusses by the method of joints, we need only
two of the three equilibrium equations because the procedures involve
concurrent forces at each joint. We can take advantage of the third or
moment equation of equilibrium by selecting an entire section of the
truss for the free body in equilibrium under the action of a nonconcurrent system of forces. This method of sections has the basic advantage
that the force in almost any desired member may be found directly from
an analysis of a section which has cut that member. Thus, it is not necessary to proceed with the calculation from joint to joint until the member in question has been reached. In choosing a section of the truss, we
note that, in general, not more than three members whose forces are
unknown should be cut, since there are only three available independent equilibrium relations.

F

A

E

B

R1

D

C

R2

L
(a)

F

E
BE

L

BE
BC

B
R1

E

EF

B

C
R2

y

x
(b)

Figure 4/12

Illustration of the Method
The method of sections will now be illustrated for the truss in Fig.
4/6, which was used in the explanation of the method of joints. The truss
is shown again in Fig. 4/12a for ready reference. The external reactions
are ﬁrst computed as with the method of joints, by considering the truss
as a whole.
Let us determine the force in the member BE, for example. An
imaginary section, indicated by the dashed line, is passed through the
truss, cutting it into two parts, Fig. 4/12b. This section has cut three
members whose forces are initially unknown. In order for the portion of
the truss on each side of the section to remain in equilibrium, it is necessary to apply to each cut member the force which was exerted on it by
the member cut away. For simple trusses composed of straight two-force
members, these forces, either tensile or compressive, will always be in
the directions of the respective members. The left-hand section is in
equilibrium under the action of the applied load L, the end reaction R1,
and the three forces exerted on the cut members by the right-hand section which has been removed.
We can usually draw the forces with their proper senses by a visual
approximation of the equilibrium requirements. Thus, in balancing the
moments about point B for the left-hand section, the force EF is clearly
to the left, which makes it compressive, because it acts toward the cut
section of member EF. The load L is greater than the reaction R1, so
that the force BE must be up and to the right to supply the needed upward component for vertical equilibrium. Force BE is therefore tensile,
since it acts away from the cut section.
With the approximate magnitudes of R1 and L in mind we see that
the balance of moments about point E requires that BC be to the right. A
casual glance at the truss should lead to the same conclusion when it is
realized that the lower horizontal member will stretch under the tension
caused by bending. The equation of moments about joint B eliminates
three forces from the relation, and EF can be determined directly. The
force BE is calculated from the equilibrium equation for the y-direction.
Finally, we determine BC by balancing moments about point E. In this

Article 4/4

Method of Sections

189

Additional Considerations
It is essential to understand that in the method of sections an entire
portion of the truss is considered a single body in equilibrium. Thus, the
forces in members internal to the section are not involved in the analysis of the section as a whole. To clarify the free body and the forces acting externally on it, the cutting section is preferably passed through the
members and not the joints. We may use either portion of a truss for the
calculations, but the one involving the smaller number of forces will
usually yield the simpler solution.
In some cases the methods of sections and joints can be combined
for an efﬁcient solution. For example, suppose we wish to ﬁnd the force
in a central member of a large truss. Furthermore, suppose that it is not
possible to pass a section through this member without passing through
at least four unknown members. It may be possible to determine the
forces in nearby members by the method of sections and then progress
to the unknown member by the method of joints. Such a combination of
the two methods may be more expedient than exclusive use of either
method.
The moment equations are used to great advantage in the method
of sections. One should choose a moment center, either on or off the section, through which as many unknown forces as possible pass.
It is not always possible to assign the proper sense of an unknown
force when the free-body diagram of a section is initially drawn. Once an
arbitrary assignment is made, a positive answer will verify the assumed
sense and a negative result will indicate that the force is in the sense opposite to that assumed. An alternative notation preferred by some is to
assign all unknown forces arbitrarily as positive in the tension direction
(away from the section) and let the algebraic sign of the answer distinguish between tension and compression. Thus, a plus sign would signify
tension and a minus sign compression. On the other hand, the advantage of assigning forces in their correct sense on the free-body diagram
of a section wherever possible is that doing so emphasizes the physical
action of the forces more directly, and this practice is the one which is
preferred here.

© jockejansson/iStockphoto

way each of the three unknowns has been determined independently of
the other two.
The right-hand section of the truss, Fig. 4/12b, is in equilibrium
under the action of R2 and the same three forces in the cut members applied in the directions opposite to those for the left section. The proper
sense for the horizontal forces can easily be seen from the balance of
moments about points B and E.

Many simple trusses are periodic in
that there are repeated and identical structural sections.

190

Chapter 4

Structures

SAMPLE PROBLEM 4/3

M
L

Calculate the forces induced in members KL, CL, and CB by the 20-ton load
on the cantilever truss.

H

I

J

K
26′

16′

Although the vertical components of the reactions at A and M are
statically indeterminate with the two ﬁxed supports, all members other than AM
are statically determinate. We may pass a section directly through members KL,
CL, and CB and analyze the portion of the truss to the left of this section as a
ᕡ statically determinate rigid body.

G

F

Solution.

The free-body diagram of the portion of the truss to the left of the section is
shown. A moment sum about L quickly veriﬁes the assignment of CB as compression, and a moment sum about C quickly discloses that KL is in tension. The
direction of CL is not quite so obvious until we observe that KL and CB intersect
at a point P to the right of G. A moment sum about P eliminates reference to KL
and CB and shows that CL must be compressive to balance the moment of the
20-ton force about P. With these considerations in mind the solution becomes
straightforward, as we now see how to solve for each of the three unknowns independently of the other two.
Summing moments about L requires ﬁnding the moment arm BL ϭ 16 ϩ
ᕢ (26 Ϫ 16)/2 ϭ 21 ft. Thus,
[ΣML ϭ 0]

20(5)(12) Ϫ CB(21) ϭ 0

CB ϭ 57.1 tons C

Ans.

Next we take moments about C, which requires a calculation of cos ␪. From the
given dimensions we see ␪ ϭ tanϪ1(5/12) so that cos ␪ ϭ 12/13. Therefore,
[ΣMC ϭ 0]

12

20(4)(12) Ϫ 13 KL(16) ϭ 0

KL ϭ 65 tons T

Ans.

Finally, we may ﬁnd CL by a moment sum about P, whose distance from C
is given by PC/16 ϭ 24/(26 Ϫ 16) or PC ϭ 38.4 ft. We also need ␤, which is given
by ␤ ϭ tanϪ1(CB/BL) ϭ tanϪ1(12/21) ϭ 29.7Њ and cos ␤ ϭ 0.868. We now have

ᕣ [ΣMp ϭ 0]

B

A

20 tons

θ
KL

L

y

CL

β
G

x
P

C

CB

20 tons

Helpful Hints

ᕡ We note that analysis by the method
of joints would necessitate working
with eight joints in order to calculate the three forces in question.
Thus, the method of sections offers a
considerable advantage in this case.

ᕢ We could have started with moments about C or P just as well.

ᕣ We could also have determined CL

20(48 Ϫ 38.4) Ϫ CL(0.868)(38.4) ϭ 0
CL ϭ 5.76 tons C

E
D
C
6 panels at 12′

Ans.

by a force summation in either the
x- or y-direction.

Article 4/4

Method of Sections

SAMPLE PROBLEM 4/4

10 kN 1

Calculate the force in member DJ of the Howe roof truss illustrated. Neglect any horizontal components of force at the supports.

191

2
D

10 kN

E

C

F

B

G

A

Solution. It is not possible to pass a section through DJ without cutting four
members whose forces are unknown. Although three of these cut by section 2 are
concurrent at J and therefore the moment equation about J could be used to obtain DE, the force in DJ cannot be obtained from the remaining two equilibrium
principles. It is necessary to consider ﬁrst the adjacent section 1 before analyzing
section 2.
The free-body diagram for section 1 is drawn and includes the reaction of
18.33 kN at A, which is previously calculated from the equilibrium of the truss
as a whole. In assigning the proper directions for the forces acting on the three
cut members, we see that a balance of moments about A eliminates the effects of
CD and JK and clearly requires that CJ be up and to the left. A balance of moments about C eliminates the effect of the three forces concurrent at C and indicates that JK must be to the right to supply sufﬁcient counterclockwise moment.
Again it should be fairly obvious that the lower chord is under tension because of
the bending tendency of the truss. Although it should also be apparent that the
top chord is under compression, for purposes of illustration the force in CD will
ᕡ be arbitrarily assigned as tension.
By the analysis of section 1, CJ is obtained from
[ΣMA ϭ 0]

0.707CJ(12) Ϫ 10(4) Ϫ 10(8) ϭ 0

CJ ϭ 14.14 kN C

In this equation the moment of CJ is calculated by considering its horizontal and
vertical components acting at point J. Equilibrium of moments about J requires
[ΣMJ ϭ 0]

0.894CD(6) ϩ 18.33(12) Ϫ 10(4) Ϫ 10(8) ϭ 0
CD ϭ Ϫ18.63 kN

The moment of CD about J is calculated here by considering its two components

ᕢ as acting through D. The minus sign indicates that CD was assigned in the

L

K

H
10 kN
6 panels at 4 m

I

10 kN
C

Section 1

CD
CJ

A

JK

J

18.33 kN

Helpful Hints

ᕡ There is no harm in assigning one or
more of the forces in the wrong direction, as long as the calculations
are consistent with the assumption.
A negative answer will show the
need for reversing the direction of
the force.

ᕢ If desired, the direction of CD may
be changed on the free-body diagram
and the algebraic sign of CD reversed in the calculations, or else the
work may be left as it stands with a
note stating the proper direction.
10 kN
10 kN

CD ϭ 18.63 kN C

From the free-body diagram of section 2, which now includes the known
ᕣ value of CJ, a balance of moments about G is seen to eliminate DE and JK.
Thus,
[ΣMG ϭ 0]

J

10 kN

wrong direction.
Hence,

6m

12DJ ϩ 10(16) ϩ 10(20) Ϫ 18.33(24) Ϫ 14.14(0.707)(12) ϭ 0
DJ ϭ 16.67 kN T

A

DE
Section 2
DJ
14.14 kN
G
JK J

18.33 kN

Ans.

Again the moment of CJ is determined from its components considered to be acting at J. The answer for DJ is positive, so that the assumed tensile direction is
correct.
An alternative approach to the entire problem is to utilize section 1 to determine CD and then use the method of joints applied at D to determine DJ.

ᕣ Observe that a section through members CD, DJ, and DE could be taken
which would cut only three unknown
members. However, since the forces
in these three members are all concurrent at D, a moment equation
about D would yield no information
about them. The remaining two force
equations would not be sufﬁcient to
solve for the three unknowns.

192

Chapter 4

Structures
4/34 Determine the force in member EF of the loaded
symmetrical truss. Assume no horizontal reactions
at the supports A and C.

PROBLEMS
Introductory Problems
4/31 Determine the force in member CG.

A
C

15°
H

10′

F

10′

G

E

10′

B

2m
15°
F

D

25°

10′
L
––
2

A
B

L
––
2

E

D

C

L
5 kips

5 kips

Problem 4/31

4/32 Determine the forces in members CG and GH of the
symmetrically loaded truss.
3m

4m

Problem 4/34

5 kips

4/35 Calculate the forces in members AB, BG, and GF.
Solve for each force from an equilibrium equation
which contains that force as the only unknown.
6 kN

3m
D

C

A 2.4 m B 2.4 m C 2.4 m
B

3m

3m

E

H

2m
E

G
5m

30°
L

A

D

F

F

L

G
H

L
––
2

L
––
2

Problem 4/35

Problem 4/32

4/33 Determine the force in member BE of the loaded truss.

4/36 Determine the forces in members BC, CF, and EF of
the loaded truss.

D

6 kN

A
30°

2m
5 kN

C

B

E

2m
4 kN

C

10°

B

F

G
F

2m

E

D

L

A

L

G
d

d

3m
Problem 4/36
Problem 4/33

d

L

Article 4/4
4/37 Determine the force in member DG of the loaded
truss.
5 panels at 4′
L

L

L

L

E

D

L

C

3′

L
30°

F

L

G

4′
3′

A

193

4/40 The truss is composed of equilateral triangles of side
a and is supported and loaded as shown. Determine
the forces in members BC and CG.

A
4′

Problems

7′

a

G
H
12′

F

a

B
a

E
C
30°

B
D
Problem 4/37

4/38 Determine the forces in members BC, BE, and BF.
The triangles are equilateral.

30°

A

B

C

Problem 4/40

4/41 Determine the forces in members BC and FG of the
loaded symmetrical truss. Show that this calculation
can be accomplished by using one section and two
equations, each of which contains only one of the
two unknowns. Are the results affected by the statical indeterminacy of the supports at the base?
12′

D

300 lb

E
K

F

G

D

E

6′
J

C

200 lb

F

L

6′

Problem 4/38

B

100 lb

I

G

Representative Problems

6′

4/39 The signboard truss is designed to support a horizontal wind load of 800 lb. If the resultant of this
load passes through point C, calculate the forces in
members BG and BF.
D

A

Problem 4/41

4/42 Determine the force in member DG for the truss
in terms of the load L. All internal angles are 60Њ.
6′

C

800 lb

H

B

C

E
6′

B

G

A

F

D

6′
6′
A

L

G
E
6′

3′

Problem 4/39

F
Problem 4/42

194

Chapter 4

Structures

4/43 The members CJ and CF of the loaded truss cross
but are not connected to members BI and DG. Compute the forces in members BC, CJ, CI, and HI.
6 kN

d

A

60°

3m
A

C

3m

3m

3m

B

D

B

G
H

L/2

15° I

J

4m

d
F

d

E

d

C

d

E

d

D

L
L

J

F
I

H

G

L
L/2
Problem 4/45

4 kN

10 kN

8 kN

Problem 4/43

4/44 The truss is composed of equilateral triangles and
supports the load L. Determine the forces in members CG and GF. Identify those members for which
the equations of equilibrium are not sufﬁcient to
determine their forces.
D

4/46 The truss shown is composed of 45Њ right triangles.
The crossed members in the center two panels are
slender tie rods incapable of supporting compression. Retain the two rods which are under tension
and compute the magnitudes of their tensions. Also
ﬁnd the force in member MN.
J

H

G

F

K

L

E

M

D

80 kN

C

E
90°

L
A

C

N

O

100 kN

B

F
Problem 4/46

B

4/47 The hinged frames ACE and DFB are connected by
two hinged bars, AB and CD, which cross without
being connected. Compute the force in AB.

G

5m
A

J

A

H

Problem 4/44

4/45 The truss supports a ramp (shown with a dashed
line) which extends from a ﬁxed approach level near
joint F to a ﬁxed exit level near J. The loads shown
represent the weight of the ramp. Determine the
forces in members BH and CD.

D

10 kN

C B

6m
4m
E

F

3m

2m

3m

Problem 4/47

Article 4/4
4/48 Compute the force in member GM of the loaded truss.

4

6

L
L
L

L
G

C

R

Q

P

N

M

75 kN
25 kN
3
4

F
J

J
2m
K

I

K

A

8 panels at 3 m

195

4

E

B

L

6

C

I

O

6

D

L
––
2

H

6m

D

B
2m
A

L

4
100
kN

25 kN

F
E

4

75 kN

L

L

L
––
2

6

Problems

H

14
G

Dimensions in meters

Problem 4/48
Problem 4/51

4/49 Determine the force in member BE of the loaded
truss.
12′

16′

12′

B

4/52 Determine the force in member HP of the loaded
truss. Members FP and GQ cross without touching
and are incapable of supporting compression.
L
––
2

C

15°

15°
F

C

40′
15°

L

26′

15°

2L

T

A
A

D

32′

B

E

L

L

45°

45°

S

L
E
22′

B

G

L
––
2

L

L

J
L

I
L

G

L

L

L
––
2

L

H
I
J
20′ 22′ 26′ 32′

P

O

N

M

K
40′
L

9 panels at 20′

4/53 Determine the forces in members FG, CG, BC, and
EF for the loaded crane truss.
0.25 m
E

0.5 m

E

A
K

L

Problem 4/52

F

L

Q

D

4/50 Determine the forces in members DJ and EJ of the
loaded truss.
D

F
20′

R

Problem 4/49

C

L

1.5 m
8m

4m
F

C
4m

L
––
2

G

6 panels at 8 m
Problem 4/50

4/51 Determine the forces in members DE, EI, FI, and HI
of the arched roof truss.

D

4m

H
L

4m

4m
B
0.25 m
4m

H

45°

A

Problem 4/53

50 kN

196

Chapter 4

Structures

4/54 Determine the force in member CG of the loaded
truss, repeated here from Prob. 4/27. The four
external reactions at A, B, E, and F are equal in magnitude and are directed perpendicular to the local
supporting surfaces.
L

᭤ 4/57 Determine the force in member DG of the compound
truss. The joints all lie on radial lines subtending angles of 15Њ as indicated, and the curved members act
as two-force members. Distance OC ϭ OA ϭ OB ϭ R.

L
D

C

F
D

15°

C

E
L

G

E

B
H

G

A

H
A

F

15° 15°
30°

1R
1.
R
0.9

3R
––
4

30°

B

O
R
R
Problem 4/57

Problem 4/54

4/55 Find the force in member JQ for the Baltimore truss
where all angles are 30Њ, 60Њ, 90Њ, or 120Њ.
U

V

W

X

Y

᭤ 4/58 A design model for a transmission-line tower is
shown in the ﬁgure. Members GH, FG, OP, and NO
are insulated cables; all other members are steel
bars. For the loading shown, compute the forces in
members FI, FJ, EJ, EK, and ER. Use a combination of methods if desired.
4m 4m 4m 4m 4m 4m

T

S

R

Q

O

P

K
L

J
B

C

D

E

F

G H

J

K

L

M

H
60°
G

100 kN 100 kN

F
30°

E
D

Problem 4/55

᭤ 4/56 In the traveling bridge crane shown all crossed
members are slender tie rods incapable of supporting compression. Determine the forces in members
DF and EF and ﬁnd the horizontal reaction on the
truss at A. Show that if CF ϭ 0, DE ϭ 0 also.
12 m

Q

P
30°

O

25 kN

25 kN

6m
B

T

U

6m

F

Problem 4/58
D

1000 kN
22 m

A

B

y
Problem 4/56

6m

S

C

5.4 m

C

6m

6m

8m
200 kN

N
60°

R

A

5 panels at 8 m

E

6m

M

I

N

A

x

Article 4/5

4/5

Space Trusses

D

Space Trusses

A space truss is the three-dimensional counterpart of the plane
truss described in the three previous articles. The idealized space truss
consists of rigid links connected at their ends by ball-and-socket joints
(such a joint is illustrated in Fig. 3/8 in Art. 3/4). Whereas a triangle of
pin-connected bars forms the basic noncollapsible unit for the plane
truss, a space truss, on the other hand, requires six bars joined at their
ends to form the edges of a tetrahedron as the basic noncollapsible unit.
In Fig. 4/13a the two bars AD and BD joined at D require a third support CD to keep the triangle ADB from rotating about AB. In Fig. 4/13b
the supporting base is replaced by three more bars AB, BC, and AC to
form a tetrahedron not dependent on the foundation for its own rigidity.
We may form a new rigid unit to extend the structure with three additional concurrent bars whose ends are attached to three ﬁxed joints on
the existing structure. Thus, in Fig. 4/13c the bars AF, BF, and CF are
attached to the foundation and therefore ﬁx point F in space. Likewise
point H is ﬁxed in space by the bars AH, DH, and CH. The three additional bars CG, FG, and HG are attached to the three ﬁxed points C, F,
and H and therefore ﬁx G in space. The ﬁxed point E is similarly created. We see now that the structure is entirely rigid. The two applied
loads shown will result in forces in all of the members. A space truss
formed in this way is called a simple space truss.
Ideally there must be point support, such as that given by a balland-socket joint, at the connections of a space truss to prevent bending in the members. As in riveted and welded connections for plane
trusses, if the centerlines of joined members intersect at a point, we
can justify the assumption of two-force members under simple tension
and compression.

B

C

A
(a)

D

C

B

A
(b)

P1

G

H
P2

F
E

Statically Determinate Space Trusses
When a space truss is supported externally so that it is statically determinate as an entire unit, a relationship exists between the number of
its joints and the number of its members necessary for internal stability
without redundancy. Because the equilibrium of each joint is speciﬁed by
three scalar force equations, there are in all 3j such equations for a space
truss with j joints. For the entire truss composed of m members there are
m unknowns (the tensile or compressive forces in the members) plus six
unknown support reactions in the general case of a statically determinate
space structure. Thus, for any space truss, the equation m ϩ 6 ϭ 3j will be
satisﬁed if the truss is statically determinate internally. A simple space
truss satisﬁes this relation automatically. Starting with the initial tetrahedron, for which the equation holds, the structure is extended by adding
three members and one joint at a time, thus preserving the equality.
As in the case of the plane truss, this relation is a necessary condition for stability, but it is not a sufficient condition, since one or more
of the m members can be arranged in such a way as not to contribute
to a stable configuration of the entire truss. If m ϩ 6 Ͼ 3j, there are
more members than there are independent equations, and the truss is
statically indeterminate internally with redundant members present.

C
D

B
A
(c)

Figure 4/13

197

198

Chapter 4

Structures

If m ϩ 6 Ͻ 3j, there is a deficiency of internal members, and the truss
is unstable and subject to collapse under load. This relationship between the number of joints and the number of members is very helpful
in the preliminary design of a stable space truss, since the configuration is not as obvious as with a plane truss, where the geometry for
statical determinacy is generally quite apparent.

Method of Joints for Space Trusses
The method of joints developed in Art. 4/3 for plane trusses may be
extended directly to space trusses by satisfying the complete vector
equation

ΣF ϭ 0

(4/1)

© Charles Dyer/Stockphoto

for each joint. We normally begin the analysis at a joint where at least one
known force acts and not more than three unknown forces are present.
Adjacent joints on which not more than three unknown forces act may
then be analyzed in turn.
This step-by-step joint technique tends to minimize the number of
simultaneous equations to be solved when we must determine the forces
in all members of the space truss. For this reason, although it is not
readily reduced to a routine, such an approach is recommended. As an
alternative procedure, however, we may simply write 3j joint equations
by applying Eq. 4/1 to all joints of the space frame. The number of unknowns will be m ϩ 6 if the structure is noncollapsible when removed
from its supports and those supports provide six external reactions.
If, in addition, there are no redundant members, then the number of
equations (3j) equals the number of unknowns (m ϩ 6), and the entire
system of equations can be solved simultaneously for the unknowns. Because of the large number of coupled equations, a computer solution is
usually required. With this latter approach, it is not necessary to begin
at a joint where at least one known and no more than three unknown
forces act.

Method of Sections for Space Trusses
The method of sections developed in the previous article may also
be applied to space trusses. The two vector equations
Space trusses are used in the design
of many transmission-line towers.

ΣF ϭ 0

and

ΣM ϭ 0

must be satisﬁed for any section of the truss, where the zero moment
sum will hold for all moment axes. Because the two vector equations are
equivalent to six scalar equations, we conclude that, in general, a section should not be passed through more than six members whose forces
are unknown. The method of sections for space trusses is not widely
used, however, because a moment axis can seldom be found which eliminates all but one unknown, as in the case of plane trusses.
Vector notation for expressing the terms in the force and moment
equations for space trusses is of considerable advantage and is used in
the sample problem which follows.

Article 4/5

SAMPLE PROBLEM 4/5

Space Trusses

199

z

The space truss consists of the rigid tetrahedron ABCD anchored by a balland-socket connection at A and prevented from any rotation about the x-, y-, or
z-axes by the respective links 1, 2, and 3. The load L is applied to joint E, which
is rigidly ﬁxed to the tetrahedron by the three additional links. Solve for the
forces in the members at joint E and indicate the procedure for the determination of the forces in the remaining members of the truss.

L

B

E

1
4m

4m
y

C

A

We note ﬁrst that the truss is supported with six properly placed
constraints, which are the three at A and the links 1, 2, and 3. Also, with m ϭ 9
members and j ϭ 5 joints, the condition m ϩ 6 ϭ 3j for a sufﬁciency of members
to provide a noncollapsible structure is satisﬁed.
The external reactions at A, B, and D can be calculated easily as a ﬁrst step,
although their values will be determined from the solution of all forces on each
ᕡ of the joints in succession.
We start with a joint on which at least one known force and not more than
three unknown forces act, which in this case is joint E. The free-body diagram of
joint E is shown with all force vectors arbitrarily assumed in their positive tenᕢ sion directions (away from the joint). The vector expressions for the three unknown forces are

Solution.

FEB ϭ

FEB
Ί2

(Ϫi Ϫ j),

FEC ϭ

FEC
(Ϫ3i Ϫ 4k),
5

FED ϭ

FED
(Ϫ3j Ϫ 4k)
5

D
3

L ϩ FEB ϩ FEC ϩ FED ϭ 0

Helpful Hints

ᕡ Suggestion: Draw a free-body diagram of the truss as a whole and verify that the external forces acting on
the truss are Ax ϭ Li, Ay ϭ Lj, Az ϭ
(4L/3)k, By ϭ 0, Dy ϭ ϪLj, Dz ϭ
Ϫ(4L/3)k.

ᕢ With this assumption, a negative

or

z

FEC
FED
(Ϫi Ϫ j) ϩ
(Ϫ3i ϩ 4k) ϩ
(Ϫ3j Ϫ 4k) ϭ 0
ϪLi ϩ
5
5
Ί2
FEB

L

B

΂

FEB
Ί2

Ϫ

E

FEB

Rearranging terms gives
ϪL Ϫ

3m

x

2

numerical value for a force indicates
compression.

Equilibrium of joint E requires
[ΣF ϭ 0]

3m

FEC

΃ ΂

΃ ΂

΃

3FEC
4FEC 4FED
FEB 3FED
iϩ Ϫ
Ϫ
jϩ Ϫ
kϭ0
Ϫ
5
5
5
5
Ί2

Equating the coefﬁcients of the i-, j-, and k-unit vectors to zero gives the three
equations
3FEC
ϩ
ϭ ϪL
5
Ί2

FEB

3FED
ϩ
ϭ0
5
Ί2

FEB

FEC ϩ FED ϭ 0

FEC ϭ Ϫ5L/6

FED ϭ 5L/6

4m

y
A
3m

3m

x

Solving the equations gives us
FEB ϭ ϪL/Ί2

FED

4m

Ans.

Thus, we conclude that FEB and FEC are compressive forces and FED is tension.
Unless we have computed the external reactions ﬁrst, we must next analyze
joint C with the known value of FEC and the three unknowns FCB, FCA, and FCD.
The procedure is identical with that used for joint E. Joints B, D, and A are then
analyzed in the same way and in that order, which limits the scalar unknowns to
three for each joint. The external reactions computed from these analyses must,
of course, agree with the values which can be determined initially from an analysis of the truss as a whole.

200

Chapter 4

Structures

PROBLEMS
(In the following problems, use plus for tension and minus
for compression.)
4/59 Determine the forces in members AB, AC, and AD.

4/61 The depicted structure is under consideration as the
upper portion of a transmission-line tower and is
supported at points F, G, H, and I. Point C is directly
above the center of rectangle FGHI. Determine the
force in member CD.

z
2a
5 kN

1.5a
1.5a

B

30°

C

2a
D

A
H
I

.5a

A

6m

G

1
a

1.25a

F

L
1.25a
D

y

1m

E

2m
B

C

L
3m
Problem 4/61

x

3m
Problem 4/59

4/60 The base of an automobile jackstand forms an equilateral triangle of side length 10 in. and is centered
under the collar A. Model the structure as one with a
ball and socket at each joint and determine the forces
in members BC, BD, and CD. Neglect any horizontal
reaction components under the feet B, C, and D.

4/62 The space truss in the form of a tetrahedron is supported by ball-and-socket connections at its base
points A and B and is prevented from rotating about
AB by the vertical tie bar CD. After noting the vertical components of the reactions under the symmetrical truss at A and B, draw a free-body diagram of the
triangular conﬁguration of links BDE and determine
the x-component of the force exerted by the foundation on the truss at B.

800 lb
z
E
D
P b

B
A

y
b

C
b

16″

A

b

b
x
Problem 4/62

B

D
10″

C

Problem 4/60

Article 4/5
4/63 Determine the forces in members AC and BD of the
inverted pyramidal truss with rectangular base.
Point M is the midpoint of BD.

E
5a

4a
M

Problems

201

4/65 For the space truss shown, check the sufﬁciency of
the supports and also the number and arrangement
of the members to ensure statical determinacy, both
external and internal. By inspection determine the
forces in members DC, CB, and CF. Calculate the
force in member AF and the x-component of the reaction on the truss at D.
z

D

B
3a
––
–
2

F
C

P
E

45°

C
D
B
x

y

A

AB = BE = AE = a
A
L

Problem 4/65

AM = 6a
Problem 4/63

4/64 The space truss of Prob. 4/63 is modiﬁed as shown
in that its supports and loading are altered. Determine the forces in members AC and BD and compare with the results of Prob. 4/63.

4/66 The space truss is shown in an intermediate stage of
design. The external constraints indicated are sufﬁcient to maintain external equilibrium. How many
additional members are needed to prevent internal
instability and where can they be placed?

G
P

E

F
E

5a

4a
M

D

B

D

L

C
C
F

A
B
Problem 4/66

A
L
AM = 6a
Problem 4/64

202

Chapter 4

Structures

4/67 Determine the forces in members AD and DG.
x

H

d

y

d

A

a

a

a

E

D

d
B

I

B

F
C
J

d
–
2

G

d

C
0.8 d

D

d

L

2a

A

L
L

E

L
F

Problem 4/67

a

4/68 The tetrahedral space truss has a horizontal base
ABC in the form of an isosceles triangle and legs AD,
BD, and CD which support the mass m from point D.
Each vertex of the base is suspended by a vertical
wire from an overhead support. Calculate the forces
induced in members AC and AB.

z

z
Problem 4/69

4/70 Each of the support points B, C, D, E, and F is
assumed to have simple frictionless contact with the
horizontal supporting surface. For the vertical load
L shown, what would be the forces in all members if
members BD and DF were removed? How would
your solution change if BD and DF were present?

y

B

L

3m

4m

45°

B

1m

r
––
4
A

A

C
6m

4m
x

F
C

r

D

E
m

Problem 4/68

4/69 The space truss shown is secured to the ﬁxed supports at A, B, and E and is loaded by the force L
which has equal x- and y-components but no vertical
z-component. Show that there is a sufﬁcient number
of members to provide internal stability and that
their placement is adequate for this purpose. Next
determine the forces in members CD, BC, and CE.

D

Problem 4/70

Article 4/5
4/71 The pyramidal truss section BCDEF is symmetric
about the vertical x-z plane as shown. Cables AE,
AF, and AB support a 5-kN load. Determine the
force in member BE.
360
mm

360
mm

z

300 mm

E

D

P

360 mm

H
F

B

G

F

D

A

360 mm
E

y
z
x

y
440 mm

B

P
C
Problem 4/72

A
5 kN
Problem 4/71

x

203

᭤ 4/72 A space truss is constructed in the form of a cube
with six diagonal members shown. Verify that the
truss is internally stable. If the truss is subjected to
the compressive forces P applied at F and D along
the diagonal FD, determine the forces in members
FE and EG.

C

300 mm

Problems

204

Chapter 4

Structures

4/6

Frames and Machines

© Imagebroker.net/SuperStock

A structure is called a frame or machine if at least one of its individual members is a multiforce member. A multiforce member is deﬁned as
one with three or more forces acting on it, or one with two or more
forces and one or more couples acting on it. Frames are structures
which are designed to support applied loads and are usually ﬁxed in position. Machines are structures which contain moving parts and are designed to transmit input forces or couples to output forces or couples.
Because frames and machines contain multiforce members, the
forces in these members in general will not be in the directions of the
members. Therefore, we cannot analyze these structures by the methods developed in Arts. 4/3, 4/4, and 4/5 because these methods apply to
simple trusses composed of two-force members where the forces are in
the directions of the members.

This “jaws-of-life” machine is used by
rescuers to pry apart wreckage.

Interconnected Rigid Bodies with Multiforce Members
In Chapter 3 we discussed the equilibrium of multiforce bodies, but
we concentrated on the equilibrium of a single rigid body. In the present
article we focus on the equilibrium of interconnected rigid bodies which include multiforce members. Although most such bodies may be analyzed as
two-dimensional systems, there are numerous examples of frames and
machines which are three-dimensional.
The forces acting on each member of a connected system are found
by isolating the member with a free-body diagram and applying the
equations of equilibrium. The principle of action and reaction must be
carefully observed when we represent the forces of interaction on the
separate free-body diagrams. If the structure contains more members or
supports than are necessary to prevent collapse, then, as in the case of
trusses, the problem is statically indeterminate, and the principles of
equilibrium, although necessary, are not sufﬁcient for solution. Although many frames and machines are statically indeterminate, we will
consider in this article only those which are statically determinate.
If the frame or machine constitutes a rigid unit by itself when removed from its supports, like the A-frame in Fig. 4/14a, the analysis is
best begun by establishing all the forces external to the structure
treated as a single rigid body. We then dismember the structure and
consider the equilibrium of each part separately. The equilibrium equations for the several parts will be related through the terms involving

P1
P
P2

Rigid
noncollapsible
(a)

(b)

Figure 4/14

Nonrigid
collapsible

Article 4/6

Frames and Machines

205

the forces of interaction. If the structure is not a rigid unit by itself but
depends on its external supports for rigidity, as illustrated in Fig. 4/14b,
then the calculation of the external support reactions cannot be completed until the structure is dismembered and the individual parts are
analyzed.
A

Force Representation and Free-Body Diagrams
In most cases the analysis of frames and machines is facilitated by
representing the forces in terms of their rectangular components. This
is particularly so when the dimensions of the parts are given in mutually perpendicular directions. The advantage of this representation is Ax
that the calculation of moment arms is simpliﬁed. In some three-dimensional problems, particularly when moments are evaluated about axes
which are not parallel to the coordinate axes, use of vector notation is
advantageous.
It is not always possible to assign the proper sense to every force or
its components when drawing the free-body diagrams, and it becomes
necessary to make an arbitrary assignment. In any event, it is absolutely
necessary that a force be consistently represented on the diagrams for interacting bodies which involve the force in question. Thus, for two bodies connected by the pin A, Fig. 4/15a, the force components must be
consistently represented in opposite directions on the separate free-body
diagrams.
For a ball-and-socket connection between members of a space
frame, we must apply the action-and-reaction principle to all three components as shown in Fig. 4/15b. The assigned directions may prove to be
wrong when the algebraic signs of the components are determined upon
calculation. If Ax, for instance, should turn out to be negative, it is actually acting in the direction opposite to that originally represented. Accordingly, we would need to reverse the direction of the force on both
members and to reverse the sign of its force terms in the equations. Or
we may leave the representation as originally made, and the proper
sense of the force will be understood from the negative sign. If we
choose to use vector notation in labeling the forces, then we must be
careful to use a plus sign for an action and a minus sign for the corresponding reaction, as shown in Fig. 4/16.
We may occasionally need to solve two or more equations simultaneously in order to separate the unknowns. In most instances, however, Ax
we can avoid simultaneous solutions by careful choice of the member or
group of members for the free-body diagram and by a careful choice of
moment axes which will eliminate undesired terms from the equations.
The method of solution described in the foregoing paragraphs is illustrated in the following sample problems.

Ay

Ax

Ay

(a)

A

Ax
Ay
Az
Az

Ay

Ax
(b)

Figure 4/15

A
– Ay

– Ax

Ay

Vector
notation

Figure 4/16

206

Chapter 4

Structures

SAMPLE PROBLEM 4/6

2m

3m

The frame supports the 400-kg load in the manner shown. Neglect the
weights of the members compared with the forces induced by the load and compute the horizontal and vertical components of all forces acting on each of the
members.

A
1.5 m
0.5 m R

0.5 m
B

E

1.5 m

F

C

Solution.

We observe ﬁrst that the three supporting members which consti-

ᕡ tute the frame form a rigid assembly that can be analyzed as a single unit. We

also observe that the arrangement of the external supports makes the frame statically determinate.
From the free-body diagram of the entire frame we determine the external
reactions. Thus,

1.5 m
400 kg

D

Helpful Hints

5.5(0.4)(9.81) Ϫ 5D ϭ 0

D ϭ 4.32 kN

ᕡ We see that the frame corresponds to

[ΣFx ϭ 0]

Ax Ϫ 4.32 ϭ 0

Ax ϭ 4.32 kN

ᕢ Without this observation, the prob-

[ΣFy ϭ 0]

Ay Ϫ 3.92 ϭ 0

Ay ϭ 3.92 kN

[ΣMA ϭ 0]

the category illustrated in Fig. 4/14a.

Next we dismember the frame and draw a separate free-body diagram of
each member. The diagrams are arranged in their approximate relative positions
to aid in keeping track of the common forces of interaction. The external reactions just obtained are entered onto the diagram for AD. Other known forces are
the 3.92-kN forces exerted by the shaft of the pulley on the member BF, as obtained from the free-body diagram of the pulley. The cable tension of 3.92 kN is
also shown acting on AD at its attachment point.
Next, the components of all unknown forces are shown on the diagrams.
ᕢ Here we observe that CE is a two-force member. The force components on CE
have equal and opposite reactions, which are shown on BF at E and on AD at C.
We may not recognize the actual sense of the components at B at ﬁrst glance, so
they may be arbitrarily but consistently assigned.
The solution may proceed by use of a moment equation about B or E for
member BF, followed by the two force equations. Thus,
3.92(5) Ϫ 1Ex(3) ϭ 0
2

Ex ϭ 13.08 kN

By ϩ 3.92 Ϫ 13.08/2 ϭ 0

By ϭ 2.62 kN

Bx ϩ 3.92 Ϫ 13.08 ϭ 0

Bx ϭ 9.15 kN

Ans.

y
Ax
x

Ans.

[ΣFx ϭ 0]

Ay

Ans.

[ΣFy ϭ 0]

lem solution would be much longer,
because the three equilibrium equations for member BF would contain
four unknowns: Bx, By, Ex, and Ey.
Note that the direction of the line
joining the two points of force application, and not the shape of the member, determines the direction of the
forces acting on a two-force member.

[ΣMB ϭ 0]

Positive numerical values of the unknowns mean that we assumed their directions correctly on the free-body diagrams. The value of Cx ϭ Ex ϭ 13.08 kN obtained by inspection of the free-body diagram of CE is now entered onto the
diagram for AD, along with the values of Bx and By just determined. The equations of equilibrium may now be applied to member AD as a check, since all the
forces acting on it have already been computed. The equations give

0.4(9.81)
= 3.92 kN
D

3.92 kN

Ay = 3.92 kN
3.92 kN
Ax =
4.32 kN

4.32(3.5) ϩ 4.32(1.5) Ϫ 3.92(2) Ϫ 9.15(1.5) ϭ 0

[ΣFx ϭ 0]

4.32 Ϫ 13.08 ϩ 9.15 ϩ 3.92 ϩ 4.32 ϭ 0

1
– Cx
2

[ΣFy ϭ 0]

3.92 kN

Ϫ13.08/2 ϩ 2.62 ϩ 3.92 ϭ 0

Ex

By

[ΣMC ϭ 0]

3.92 kN
3.92 kN

3.92 kN

Bx
Cx
Cx

D=
4.32 kN

1
– Ex
2

By

2
1

1
– Cx
2

3.92 kN
Ex

Article 4/6

Frames and Machines

SAMPLE PROBLEM 4/7

B

Neglect the weight of the frame and compute the forces acting on all of its
members.

30 lb

20″

12″
F

We note ﬁrst that the frame is not a rigid unit when removed from
ᕡ its supports since BDEF is a movable quadrilateral and not a rigid triangle. Consequently the external reactions cannot be completely determined until the individual members are analyzed. However, we can determine the vertical
components of the reactions at A and C from the free-body diagram of the frame
ᕢ as a whole. Thus,

D

50 lb

Solution.

[ΣMC ϭ 0]
[ΣFy ϭ 0]

50(12) ϩ 30(40) Ϫ 30Ay ϭ 0
Cy Ϫ 50(4/5) Ϫ 60 ϭ 0

Ay ϭ 60 lb

20″

12″

E
A

C
30″

Ans.

Cy ϭ 100 lb

30 lb

Ans.

3

4

Next we dismember the frame and draw the free-body diagram of each part.
Since EF is a two-force member, the direction of the force at E on ED and at F on
AB is known. We assume that the 30-lb force is applied to the pin as a part of
ᕣ member BC. There should be no difﬁculty in assigning the correct directions for
forces E, F, D, and Bx. The direction of By, however, may not be assigned by inspection and therefore is arbitrarily shown as downward on AB and upward on BC.

50 lb
y
x

Ax

Cx

Ay

Member ED.
[ΣMD ϭ 0]
[ΣF ϭ 0]

Member EF.

Member AB.
[ΣMA ϭ 0]
[ΣFx ϭ 0]
[ΣFy ϭ 0]

The two unknowns are easily obtained by
50(12) Ϫ 12E ϭ 0
D Ϫ 50 Ϫ 50 ϭ 0

Cy

Helpful Hints

E ϭ 50 lb

Ans.

ᕡ We see that this frame corresponds to

D ϭ 100 lb

Ans.

ᕢ The directions of Ax and Cx are not

Clearly F is equal and opposite to E with the magnitude of 50 lb.

the category illustrated in Fig. 4/14b.
obvious initially and can be assigned
arbitrarily, to be corrected later if
necessary.

ᕣ Alternatively the 30-lb force could
be applied to the pin considered a
part of BA, with a resulting change
in the reaction Bx.

Since F is now known, we solve for Bx, Ax, and By from
50(3/5)(20) Ϫ Bx(40) ϭ 0

Bx ϭ 15 lb

Ans.

Ax ϩ 15 Ϫ 50(3/5) ϭ 0

Ax ϭ 15 lb

By

Ans.

50(4/5) Ϫ 60 Ϫ By ϭ 0

By ϭ Ϫ20 lb

By
30 lb

Bx Bx

3

y

Ans.

4

F

The minus sign shows that we assigned By in the wrong direction.

x

3
4

Member BC. The results for Bx, By, and D are now transferred to BC, and the
30 ϩ 100(3/5) Ϫ 15 Ϫ Cx ϭ 0

Cx ϭ 75 lb

Ans.

We may apply the remaining two equilibrium equations as a check. Thus,
[ΣFy ϭ 0]
[ΣMC ϭ 0]

D
D

F
E

ᕤ remaining unknown Cx is found from
[ΣFx ϭ 0]

207

3

Ax
A y = 60 lb

4
E

50 lb

Cx
Cy = 100 lb

100 ϩ (Ϫ20) Ϫ 100(4/5) ϭ 0

ᕤ Alternatively we could have re-

(30 Ϫ 15)(40) ϩ (Ϫ20)(30) ϭ 0

turned to the free-body diagram of
the frame as a whole and found Cx.

208

Chapter 4

Structures

SAMPLE PROBLEM 4/8

120

The machine shown is designed as an overload protection device which releases the load when it exceeds a predetermined value T. A soft metal shear pin
S is inserted in a hole in the lower half and is acted on by the upper half. When
the total force on the pin exceeds its strength, it will break. The two halves then
rotate about A under the action of the tensions in BD and CD, as shown in the
second sketch, and rollers E and F release the eye bolt. Determine the maximum
allowable tension T if the pin S will shear when the total force on it is 800 N.
Also compute the corresponding force on the hinge pin A.

Because of symmetry we analyze only one of the two hinged members. The upper part is chosen, and its free-body diagram along with that for the
connection at D is drawn. Because of symmetry the forces at S and A have no
ᕡ x-components. The two-force members BD and CD exert forces of equal magnitude B ϭ C on the connection at D. Equilibrium of the connection gives

36

60

B
E

50
S

T

D
Dimensions
in millimeters

T

A
F

C

Solution.

[ΣFx ϭ 0]

B cos ␪ ϩ C cos ␪ Ϫ T ϭ 0

Released
position

y

2B cos ␪ ϭ T

B

B ϭ T/(2 cos ␪)
T

From the free-body diagram of the upper part we express the equilibrium of
moments about point A. Substituting S ϭ 800 N and the expression for B gives

ᕢ [ΣMA ϭ 0]

T
T
T
(cos ␪)(50) ϩ
(sin ␪)(36) Ϫ 36(800) Ϫ (26) ϭ 0
2 cos ␪
2 cos ␪
2

Substituting sin ␪/cos ␪ ϭ tan ␪ ϭ 5/12 and solving for T give

΂

T 25 ϩ
T ϭ 1477 N

΃

5(36)
Ϫ 13 ϭ 28 800
2(12)
or

T ϭ 1.477 kN

Ans.

Finally, equilibrium in the y-direction gives us
[ΣFy ϭ 0]

S Ϫ B sin ␪ Ϫ A ϭ 0
800 Ϫ

1477 5
ϪAϭ0
2(12/13) 13

A ϭ 492 N

B
A

θ x
θ
C

T
––
2

S
A

Helpful Hints

ᕡ It is always useful to recognize symmetry. Here it tells us that the forces
acting on the two parts behave as
mirror images of each other with respect to the x-axis. Thus, we cannot
have an action on one member in the
plus x-direction and its reaction on
the other member in the negative
x-direction. Consequently the forces
at S and A have no x-components.

ᕢ Be careful not to forget the moment of
Ans.

24

the y-component of B. Note that our
units here are newton-millimeters.

Article 4/6

SAMPLE PROBLEM 4/9

0.2 m

In the particular position shown, the excavator applies a
20-kN force parallel to the ground. There are two hydraulic
cylinders AC to control the arm OAB and a single cylinder
DE to control arm EBIF. (a) Determine the force in the hydraulic cylinders AC and the pressure pAC against their pistons, which have an effective diameter of 95 mm. (b) Also
determine the force in hydraulic cylinder DE and the pressure pDE against its 105-mm-diameter piston. Neglect the
weights of the members compared with the effects of the 20kN force.

Frames and Machines

0.4 m

0.6 m
0.9 m 1.4 m

2.1 m

0.1 m
0.4 m

209

D
E

A

0.28 m
0.45 m

0.55 m
G

3.5 m
H
J

O

B

C

I
F
20 kN

(a) We begin by constructing a free-body diagram of the entire arm
assembly. Note that we include only the dimensions necessary for this portion of
the problem—details of the cylinders DE and GH are unnecessary at this time.

Solution.

[ΣMO ϭ 0]

Ϫ20 000(3.95) Ϫ 2FAC cos 41.3Њ(0.68) ϩ 2FAC sin 41.3Њ(2) ϭ 0
FAC ϭ 48 800 N or 48.8 kN
FAC

ᕡ From FAC ϭ pAC AAC, pAC ϭ

AAC

ϭ

48 800

΂␲ 0.095 ΃
4
2

Ans.
Helpful Hint

ϭ 6.89(106) Pa or 6.89 MPa Ans.

ᕡ Recall that force ϭ (pressure)(area).

(b) For cylinder DF, we “cut” the assembly at a location which makes the desired
cylinder force external to our free-body diagram. This means isolating the vertical arm EBIF along with the bucket and its applied force.
[ΣMB ϭ 0]

Ϫ20 000(3.5) ϩ FDE cos 11.31Њ(0.73) ϩ FDE sin 11.31Њ(0.4) ϭ 0
FDE ϭ 88 100 N or 88.1 kN
p

DE

ϭ

FDE
ADE

ϭ

88 100

΂

0.1052
␲
4

΃

Ans.

ϭ 10.18(106) Pa or 10.18 MPa

0.4 m

2m

β

A

Oy

2FAC

Ans.

α

O

B

3.95 m
α=

tan−1

(

0.4 + 0.28 + 0.55
–––––––––––––– = 41.3°
1.4

)

20 kN

By

0.73 m

Ox

C

E

0.68 m

3.5 m

D

FDE
Bx

0.1 + 0.4
β = tan−1 –––––––– = 11.31°
0.4 + 2.1

(

20 kN
(a)

(b)

)

210

Chapter 4

Structures

PROBLEMS
(Unless otherwise instructed, neglect the mass of the various members and all friction in the problems which follow.)

Introductory Problems
4/73 Determine the magnitude of the pin reaction at B by
(a) ignoring the fact that BD is a two-force member
and (b) recognizing the fact that BD is a two-force
member.

4/76 Determine the force (magnitude and direction)
which member BC exerts on member AB (a) if the
900-N load is applied to the center of member AB,
and (b) if the 900-N load is applied to the center of
member BC.
900 N
(a)
A

0.6 m

0.6 m

B

30°
(b)

6′

4′

C

y

A

B

3′
C

x

1000 lb
Problem 4/76

D
Problem 4/73

4/74 For what value M of the clockwise couple will the
horizontal component Ax of the pin reaction at A be
zero? If a couple of that same magnitude M were
applied in a counterclockwise direction, what would
be the value of Ax?
3′

4/77 For an 80-N squeeze on the handles of the pliers, determine the force F applied to the round rod by each
jaw. In addition, calculate the force supported by the
pin at A.
80 N
35 mm

95 mm

3′
2′

B

A

A
y

150 lb

2′

M
60°

x

C
80 N

Problem 4/74
Problem 4/77

4/75 Determine the components of all forces acting on
each member of the loaded frame.
P

P

C

R

A

45°
y

45°

x
Problem 4/75

B

Article 4/6
4/78 The automobile bumper jack is designed to support
a 4000-N downward load. Begin with a free-body
diagram of BCD and determine the force supported
by roller C. Note that roller B does not contact the
vertical column.

Problems

211

4/80 Determine the cutting force F exerted on the rod S
in terms of the forces P applied to the handles of the
heavy-duty cutter.
C
15°

1.5″

150 mm

150 mm

D
400 mm
A

4000 N

P

1.5″

15°
E

G

100 mm

B

240 mm

A

C

B

E

D

S
C

D

H

2″
E

4.5″

22″

P

F
Problem 4/80

1000 mm

4/81 Determine the components of all forces acting on
each member of the loaded frame.

Problem 4/78

4/79 The wingnut B of the collapsible bucksaw is tightened until the tension in rod AB is 200 N. Determine
the force in the saw blade EF and the magnitude F
of the force supported by pin C.

5 kN

1.5 m

1.5 m
B

25°

25°

y
3m

A
80 mm

B

C

D

x

160 mm

E

F
A

Problem 4/81
Problem 4/79

3m
C

6m

212

Chapter 4

Structures

4/82 Calculate the magnitude of the force acting on the
pin at D. Pin C is ﬁxed in DE and bears against the
smooth slot in the triangular plate.

80 N
62.5 mm

50 mm
C

B
E
A

80 mm

100 N
B

15 mm
D

E

6.25 mm

C

140 mm

80 N

120 mm
A

Problem 4/84

D

160 mm
Problem 4/82

4/83 The device shown in the ﬁgure is designed to drive
brads into picture-framing material. For a gripping
force of 10 lb on the handles, determine the force F
exerted on the brad.

4/85 The elements of a bicycle center-pull brake are
shown in the ﬁgure. The two brake arms freely
rotate about ﬁxed pivots at C and D (the support
bracket is not shown). If the brake-cable tension applied at H is T ϭ 160 N, determine the normal forces
exerted on the wheel by brakepads E and F.
T

15
19
mm mm

6 mm

0.75″
2.5″
10 lb

A
C

H

1″
30 mm

B
A

B

C

D

D

25 mm
10 lb
Problem 4/83
44 mm

4/84 A pair of 80-N forces is applied to the handles of the
small eyelet squeezer. The block at A slides with
negligible friction in a slot machined in the lower
part of the tool. Neglect the small force of the light
return spring AE and determine the compressive
force P applied to the eyelet.

E

F
5°

Problem 4/85

Article 4/6
4/86 The device shown is used to straighten bowed decking boards just prior to ﬁnal nailing to the joists.
There is a lower bracket (not shown) at O which
ﬁxes the part OA to a joist, so that the pivot A may
be considered ﬁxed. For a given force P exerted perpendicular to the handle ABC as shown, determine
the corresponding normal force N applied to the
bent board near point B. Neglect friction.

Problems

the position shown. Note that link AB and its counterpart are both horizontal in the ﬁgure for this position.
R
4″
1″
1″

P
4″

1.25″
1.25″
A

B
C

O

R

A

2°

213

B
7″

18″

2″ 1″
Problem 4/88

20″

Representative Problems

P

4/89 For the paper punch shown, ﬁnd the punching force
Q corresponding to a hand grip P.

C
15°

b

Problem 4/86
a

P

a

4/87 In the spring clamp shown, an internal spring is
coiled around the pin at A and the spring ends bear
against the inner surfaces of the handle halves in
order to provide the desired clamping force. In the
position shown, a force of magnitude P ϭ 25 N is
required to release the clamp. Determine the compressive force at B if P ϭ 0.
P
P
Problem 4/89

A

B

4/90 The elements of a ﬂoor jack are shown in the ﬁgure.
The ﬁgure CDFE is a parallelogram. Calculate the
force in the hydraulic cylinder AB corresponding to
the 2000-lb load supported as shown. What is the
force in link EF?
2000 lb

P
110 mm

4.75″

40 mm

1.25″

9.25″
D

Problem 4/87

4/88 The “jaws-of-life” device is utilized by rescuers to pry
apart wreckage, thus helping to free accident victims.
If a pressure of 500 lb /in.2 is developed behind the piston P of area 20 in.2, determine the vertical force R
which is exerted by the jaw tips on the wreckage for

2.5″

1.25″

C

2.85″

F

A
B

E

Problem 4/90

214

Chapter 4

Structures

4/91 Determine the force P exerted on the twig G. Note
that there is a horizontal line of symmetry for the
handles, but there is no line of symmetry for the
jaws.

4/93 Determine the magnitude of the pin reaction at A
and the magnitude and direction of the force reaction at the rollers. The pulleys at C and D are small.
D

20 N

A

0.5 m

C

G
9 mm
10 mm

E
C

F

A

F

B

E
D
36
mm

25 21
mm mm

60 kg
B

0.4 m

88 mm

Problem 4/91

4/92 An outrigger extension for a traveling crane is designed for loading ships. The beam AB has a mass of
8 Mg with mass center at its midlength. The boom
BC has a mass of 2 Mg with mass center 5 m from
end C. The 2000-kg carriage D is symmetrical about
its load line. Calculate the magnitude of the force
supported by the hinge at A for a load m ϭ 20 Mg.
y
10 m
D

B

A

x

7m

C

m

0.4 m

Problem 4/93

20 N

4m

0.4 m

4/94 The ﬁgure illustrates a common problem associated
with simple structures. Under the loadings L, the
rafters can rotate, the ridge beam at A can lower,
and the walls BC and DE can rotate outward, as
shown in part b of the ﬁgure. This phenomenon is
sometimes clearly observed in old wooden farm
structures as a central sagging of the ridge beam
when viewed from the side. A simple remedy is
shown in part a of the ﬁgure. A chain or cable is
stretched between fasteners at B and E, and the
turnbuckle F is tightened until a proper tension is
achieved, thereby preventing the outward tilting of
the walls. For given values of the dimension d and
the point loads L (which result from the distributed
loads of the rafter and rooﬁng weights and any additional loads such as snow), calculate the tension T
required so that there are no outward forces on the
walls at B and E. Assume that the support of the
rafters at the ridge beam is purely horizontal and
that all joints are free to rotate.
d
––
6

d
––
3

d
––
2
L

A

1.5 m

L

7
12

B

F

E

(a)

Problem 4/92
C

D

Article 4/6

L

Problems

4/96 The ramp is used as passengers board a small commuter airplane. The total mass of the ramp and six
passengers is 750 kg with mass center at G. Determine the force in the hydraulic cylinder AB and the
magnitude of the pin reaction at C.

L
A

(b)
G
B

740 mm

A

Problem 4/94

C

4/95 Determine the cutting force F applied by the blade
DE to the bar at G in terms of the force P applied to
the handle of the heavy-duty cutter. Assume that
the cutting force F is perpendicular to the lower
edge of the blade DE.

605 mm

1210 mm 2300 mm
Problem 4/96

P
C

5
64

17

413
A

B
13
G

A

B
E

D

48

G

Dimensions in millimeters
Problem 4/95

28

E

D

37

215

14°

5

216

Chapter 4

Structures

4/97 The handheld press is useful for such tasks as
squeezing rivets or punching holes. What force P is
applied to the sheet metal at E for the 60-N forces
applied to the handles?

80
mm

A

200
mm

C

P

θ
60 N
205 mm
200
mm

A
6 mm

piston

55 mm
C
D
52 mm

17 mm
27 mm

B
40
mm

B
E
60 N

Problem 4/99
Problem 4/97

4/98 The toggle pliers are used for a variety of clamping
purposes. For the handle position given by ␣ ϭ 10Њ
and for a handle grip P ϭ 150 N, calculate the
clamping force C produced. Note that pins A and D
are symmetric about the horizontal centerline of the
tool.
20 mm

P

60 mm

4/100 Compute the force in link AB of the lifting tongs
which cross without touching.

18″

18″
E

12″

C

D
20″
A

B

A

20 mm

P

800 lb

O

α

24″

B
D

m
100 m

F

G
30″
Problem 4/100

Problem 4/98

4/99 The ﬁgure shows a high-pressure hand pump used
for boosting oil pressure in a hydraulic line. When
the handle is in equilibrium at ␪ ϭ 15Њ under the action of a force P ϭ 120 N, determine the oil pressure
p which acts on the 46-mm-diameter piston. (Pressure on the top of the piston is atmospheric.)

4/101 The top of the folding workbench has a mass of
50 kg with mass center at G. Calculate the x- and
y-components of the force supported by the pin at E.

Article 4/6

217

740 mm

750 mm

1700 mm

600 mm

G
D

150 mm

G1

890 mm

H

G2

A

900 mm

y

3060 mm

B

O

B

225 mm
F

Problems

E
A

C

Problem 4/103

x

1200 mm
Problem 4/101

4/102 The elements of a spring-loaded mechanism for a
car-trunk lid are shown in the ﬁgure. For the equilibrium position shown, determine the moment MA
which each of two torsional springs at A must exert
on link AB. The mass of the trunk lid is 18 kg with
mass center at G. The effects of the weights of the
other members may be neglected.

4/104 The forklift area of the machine of Prob. 4/103 is
shown with additional dimensional detail. Determine the force in the single hydraulic cylinder CD.
The mass of the cube of bricks is 2000 kg with mass
center at G2. You may neglect the effects of the
mass of the forklift components.

C
G2

735 mm
215 mm

E
D

205 mm

80 mm

480
mm

835
mm
35 mm

G

Problem 4/104
350 mm
23 mm

O

28 mm

A B
15 mm

C
60 mm

Problem 4/102

4/103 The machine shown is used for moving heavy items
such as pallets of bricks around construction sites.
For the horizontal boom position shown, determine
the force in each of the two hydraulic cylinders AB.
The mass of the boom is 1500 kg with mass center
at G1, and the mass of the cube of bricks is 2000 kg
with mass center at G2.

4/105 Determine the force P which must be applied at A
in order to support the 100-kg crate. There are two
of every member shown with connecting members
(perpendicular to the paper) at every joint, and a
light platform bridges the two members DE. Friction at the joints is negligible and all members are
light. Friction beneath members CF is sufﬁcient to
prevent slippage.
P

A

305 mm

675 mm

100 kg
G

B
D

190 mm

E
76 mm
F

C
610 mm
70 mm
Problem 4/105

130 mm

218

Chapter 4

Structures

4/106 In the special position shown for the log hoist,
booms AF and EG are at right angles to one another and AF is perpendicular to AB. If the hoist
is handling a log weighing 4800 lb, compute the
forces supported by the pins at A and D in this one
position due to the weight of the log.

1
6 –– ″
2

D
5
4 –– ″
8

A
F

900 lb

2′

E

7
7
3 –– ″ 3 –– ″
8
8

C
B
1
1 –– ″
2

E

12
″

12
′

8′

F

″

D

12

G

A
24

″

45°

4/109 A modiﬁcation of the pallet puller of Prob. 4/108 is
shown here. For the same net 900-lb force as in
Prob. 4/108, determine the magnitude of the force
supported by pin C and the normal gripping forces
at A and B.

4′

C

Problem 4/108

10′

7
7
7
3 –– ″ 3 –– ″ 3 –– ″
8
8
8

B
450 lb
Problem 4/106

4/107 The knurling tool produces a knurled gripping surface on the rotating shaft A in the lathe. The force
exerted on the shaft by the imprinting rollers B is
produced by the adjusting screw C and the force F
exerted by the lathe toolpost on the pivoted shank
of the knurling tool. If screw C is under a tension of
1.2 kN for the conﬁguration shown, determine the
toolpost force F and the force P supported by the
bearing of each knurling roller B.
C

B
A

D

5
4 –– ″
8

A
F

C
B

450 lb

H

1
1 –– ″
2

E
Problem 4/109

4/110 The upper jaw D of the toggle press slides with negligible frictional resistance along the ﬁxed vertical
column. Calculate the compressive force R exerted
on the cylinder E and the force supported by the
pin at A if a force F ϭ 200 N is applied to the handle at an angle ␪ ϭ 75Њ.
250

O

86
mm

G

1
6 –– ″
2

F

mm

θ
100

B
20
mm

64
mm

80
mm

F
B

Problem 4/107

4/108 The device shown is used to drag loaded wooden
pallets across warehouse ﬂoors. The wood board
shown is one of several members that comprise the
base of the pallet. For the 900-lb force applied by a
forklift, determine the magnitude of the force supported by pin C and the normal gripping forces at
A and B.

A
mm

100

mm
C

D
E

Problem 4/110

Article 4/6
4/111 The elements of a front-hinged automobile-hood
assembly are shown in the ﬁgure. The light linkages BC and CD and the gas-pressurized strut EF
hold the hood in the open position shown. In this
position, the hood is free to rotate clockwise about
pin O; pin A is locked until the hood has been lowered to a nearly closed horizontal position. For a
hood weight of 80 lb with center of gravity at G,
determine the minimum compression force C in
the strut which will maintain the open-hood position. Note that there are two links OA spaced
across the front of the car, but only one set of the
remaining links, located on the inside of the rightfront fender.

Problems

219

x
P
A

45°

F

B

L
E

D

C
L
Problem 4/112

60°

7″

G
B

10″
40°
40°

C

A

5°
F
O

AO = 4″

E
75°

4/113 The contractor’s ladder jack has welded hooks A
and B which ﬁt over the rungs of a vertical ladder
and support one end of a scaffold plank. The homogeneous crate and portion of a plank supported
by the jack have a combined mass of 84 kg. All of
the vertical force is supported by the hook at A,
and the three bolts support force but not torque.
Calculate the total force supported by the bolt at
E. Compare the vertical component of the force at
E with the vertical component of force supported
by the hook at A.

D

150
mm

300
mm

100
mm

DE = 3″

BC = CD = 9″

40
mm

A

Problem 4/111

375
mm

E

4/112 The carpenter builds the square frame ABCD and
then braces it with member EF as shown in order
to prevent racking (distortion into a rhombic
shape) under the applied force P. Determine the
tension T in the brace as a function of x. Take all
connections to be pin joints. Member DC is ﬁrmly
fastened to the ﬂoor.

D
300
mm
C
B

Problem 4/113

220

Chapter 4

Structures

4/114 The elements of a rear suspension for a frontwheel-drive car are shown in the ﬁgure. Determine
the magnitude of the force at each joint if the normal force F exerted on the tire has a magnitude of
3600 N.

40′′ 17′′ 57′′

G

60 mm

C

220
mm
F
130 mm

D
54′′
A
B

E
54′′

C

60 mm

F

H

D

245 mm

A

E B
260
mm

Problem 4/116

165
mm
F = 3600 N
90 mm

Problem 4/114

4/115 Calculate the x- and y-components of all forces acting on each member of the loaded frame.
D

4/117 The designers of lamp mechanisms, such as that
shown in the ﬁgure, usually rely on joint friction to
aid in maintaining static equilibrium. For the present problem, assume that sufﬁcient friction exists
at point C to prevent rotation there, but ignore friction at all other joints. If the mass of the lamp ﬁxture is 0.6 kg with mass center at G, determine the
spring force FS necessary for equilibrium in the
position shown.

600 N
A

300

300

60 60
mm mm

F

C
B

E

E
225 mm

y

120 N·m

B

65 mm

F

15°
D

C
G

225 mm
A

60°

60°

200

400

G

x

200

Dimensions in millimeters
Problem 4/115

4/116 The truck shown is used to deliver food to aircraft.
The elevated unit weighs 2000 lb with center of
gravity at G. Determine the required force in the
hydraulic cylinder AB.

Problem 4/117

4/118 A double-axle suspension for use on small trucks is
shown in the ﬁgure. The mass of the central frame
F is 40 kg, and the mass of each wheel and attached
link is 35 kg with center of mass 680 mm from the
vertical centerline. For a load L ϭ 12 kN transmitted to the frame F, compute the total shear force
supported by the pin at A.

500 mm
F

L

A
400 mm

750 mm
Problem 4/118

Article 4/6
4/119 Determine the compression force C exerted on the
can for an applied force P ϭ 50 N when the can
crusher is in the position shown. Note that there
are two links AB and two links AOD, with one pair
of linkages on each side of the stationary portion of
the crusher. Also, pin B is on the vertical centerline
of the can. Finally, note that small square projections E of the moving jaw move in recessed slots of
the ﬁxed frame.

Problems

221

4/121 Determine the force in cylinder AB due to the combined weight of the bucket and operator. The combined mass is 180 kg with mass center at G.

G

1960

5°

E
B

D
B

255
670
255
255

F

A
C

E
2268

10°

748

215

O

215

Dimensions in millimeters

P = 50 N
65 mm

Problem 4/121
A

18 mm

D
70 mm

240 mm
Problem 4/119

4/122 Additional detail in the bucket area of the cherrypicker of Prob. 4/121 is given in the ﬁgure. Solve
for the force in cylinder HJ due to the effects of the
180-kg combined mass of the bucket and operator,
with mass center at G.

4/120 Determine the compression force C exerted on the
can for an applied force P ϭ 50 N when the can
crusher is in the position shown. Point B is centered on the bottom of the can.

K
H
395 mm

72 mm
O
B

G
J

305 mm
I

A

1000 mm
225 mm
10°
140 mm

Problem 4/122

30°

P = 50 N

Problem 4/120

670 mm

222

Chapter 4

Structures

4/123 Determine the force in the hydraulic cylinder AB
and the magnitude of the pin reaction at O for the
position shown. The bucket and its load have a
combined weight of 4000 lb with center of gravity
at G. You may neglect the effect of the weights of
the other members.

side of the machine. Calculate the compression F in
each of the cylinders and the magnitude of the
force supported by each of the pins at H, one on
each side. Assume that the wheels are free to turn
so that there are no horizontal components of force
under the wheels.
A

B
O

G1
1000

B
G

E
G2

11′′
13′′

A

H

F
D

C
1500

1500 1000 1500 500

Dimensions in millimeters
50′′

Problem 4/125

50′′
6′′
Problem 4/123

4/124 Consider the additional dimensional detail for the
front-end loader of Prob. 4/123. Determine the
force in the hydraulic cylinder CE. The weight of
the bucket and its load is 4000 lb with center of
gravity at G. You may ignore the effects of the
weights of other members.
2′′

3′′

4/126 An automatic window-positioning system for a
greenhouse is shown in the ﬁgure. Window OA has
a mass of 50 kg with mass center at G. A motor
(not shown) drives the gear C, which in turn moves
the positioning rack AB. For the window position
shown, determine the motor torque M which must
be supplied to the pinion C. Neglect the weight of
bar AB.
D

M

12′′

570 mm

180 mm

C

O
B

E
12′′
D
5′′

G

295 mm
Pitch
diameter

410 mm

G
C

765 mm

F
15′′

30°

A

C
Problem 4/126
16′′
Problem 4/124

4/125 The power unit A of the tractor-scraper has a mass
of 4 Mg with mass center at G1. The fully loaded
trailer-scraper unit B has a mass of 24 Mg with
mass center at G2. Positioning of the scraper is controlled by two hydraulic cylinders EF, one on each

4/127 The pruning mechanism of a pole saw is shown as
it cuts a branch S. For the particular position
drawn, the actuating cord is parallel to the pole and
carries a tension of 30 lb. Determine the shearing
force P applied to the branch by the cutter and the
total force supported by the pin at E. The force
exerted by the light return spring at C is small and
may be neglected.

Article 4/6

Problems

223

4/129 Determine the components of the reaction at A for
the loaded space frame shown. Each connection
may be treated as a ball-and-socket joint.

F
20°
20°

C

30 lb

z
20°
D

B

1.5 m

A

E

6 kN

S
75°

2m

C

1
AB = 1″, BC = ED = 3″, EB = DC = 4 – ″, DF = 6″
2

B
4m

Problem 4/127

᭤ 4/128 The design of a hoisting mechanism for the dump
truck is shown in the enlarged view. Determine the
compression P in the hydraulic cylinder BE and the
magnitude of the force supported by the pin at A
for the particular position shown, where BA is perpendicular to OAE and link DC is perpendicular to
AC. The dump and its load together weigh 20,000
lb with center of gravity at G. All dimensions for
the indicated geometry are given on the ﬁgure.

5 kN

A
1.5 m
1.5 m

4m
x

E

y

D
Problem 4/129

4/130 In the schematic representation of an actual structure, T represents a turnbuckle, C and D are nonthrust-bearing hinges whose axes are along the line
CD, and B, E, and F are ball-and-socket joints.
Determine the tension T in the turnbuckle and the
force in member EF.

48″
G
D
B

36″

24.5°

C

E

A

x
1′
7′

A
D

9″
29.

12″

1.5′
y
1.5′

F

G

D
1200 lb

69.5°

″
12

B

E
C

T

1″
8.9
O

50°

B

4′

O

C

24.5° 12″

E

A
20″

Problem 4/130
48″

Detail of hoisting mechanism
Problem 4/128

224

Chapter 4

Structures

4/7

Chapter Review

In Chapter 4 we have applied the principles of equilibrium to two
classes of problems: (a) simple trusses and (b) frames and machines. No
new theory was needed, since we merely drew the necessary free-body diagrams and applied our familiar equations of equilibrium. The structures
dealt with in Chapter 4, however, have given us the opportunity to further
develop our appreciation for a systematic approach to mechanics problems.
The most essential features of the analysis of these two classes of
structures are reviewed in the following statements.

(a) Simple Trusses
1. Simple trusses are composed of two-force members joined at their
ends and capable of supporting tension or compression. Each internal force, therefore, is always in the direction of the line joining the
endpoints of its member.
2. Simple trusses are built from the basic rigid (noncollapsible) unit of
the triangle for plane trusses and the tetrahedron for space trusses.
Additional units of a truss are formed by adding new members, two
for plane trusses and three for space trusses, attached to existing
joints and joined at their ends to form a new joint.
3. The joints of simple trusses are assumed to be pin connections for
plane trusses and ball-and-socket connections for space trusses.
Thus, the joints can transmit force but not moment.
4. External loads are assumed to be applied only at the joints.
5. Trusses are statically determinate externally when the external
constraints are not in excess of those required to maintain an equilibrium position.
6. Trusses are statically determinate internally when constructed in
the manner described in item (2), where internal members are not
in excess of those required to prevent collapse.
7. The method of joints utilizes the force equations of equilibrium for
each joint. Analysis normally begins at a joint where at least one
force is known and not more than two forces are unknown for plane
trusses or not more than three forces are unknown for space trusses.
8. The method of sections utilizes a free body of an entire section of a
truss containing two or more joints. In general, the method involves
the equilibrium of a nonconcurrent system of forces. The moment
equation of equilibrium is especially useful when the method of sections is used. In general, the forces acting on a section which cuts
more than three unknown members of a plane truss cannot be
solved for completely because there are only three independent
equations of equilibrium.
9. The vector representing a force acting on a joint or a section is
drawn on the same side of the joint or section as the member which
transmits the force. With this convention, tension is indicated when
the force arrow is away from the joint or section, and compression is
indicated when the arrow points toward the joint or section.

Article 4/7

10. When the two diagonal members which brace a quadrilateral panel
are ﬂexible members incapable of supporting compression, only the
one in tension is retained in the analysis, and the panel remains
statically determinate.
11. When two joined members under load are collinear and a third
member with a different direction is joined with their connection,
the force in the third member must be zero unless an external force
is applied at the joint with a component normal to the collinear
members.

(b) Frames and Machines
1. Frames and machines are structures which contain one or more
multiforce members. A multiforce member is one which has acting
on it three or more forces, or two or more forces and one or more
couples.
2. Frames are structures designed to support loads, generally under
static conditions. Machines are structures which transform input
forces and moments to output forces and moments and generally involve moving parts. Some structures may be classiﬁed as either a
frame or a machine.
3. Only frames and machines which are statically determinate externally and internally are considered here.
4. If a frame or machine as a whole is a rigid (noncollapsible) unit
when its external supports are removed, then we begin the analysis
by computing the external reactions on the entire unit. If a frame or
machine as a whole is a nonrigid (collapsible) unit when its external
supports are removed, then the analysis of the external reactions
cannot be completed until the structure is dismembered.
5. Forces acting in the internal connections of frames and machines
are calculated by dismembering the structure and constructing a
separate free-body diagram of each part. The principle of action and
reaction must be strictly observed; otherwise, error will result.
6. The force and moment equations of equilibrium are applied to the
members as needed to compute the desired unknowns.

Chapter Review

225

226

Chapter 4

Structures

REVIEW PROBLEMS

P

4/131 Determine the force in member BE of the loaded truss.

C

A

1m

A

F

H

13 mm
3 mm

B

32
mm

60
mm

P

30 mm

D E

1m

B

G

F

16 mm

33
mm

16 mm

E

Problem 4/134

45°

45°

C

4/135 Each of the horizontal platforms of a warehouse
rack has a mass of 20 kg and carries a centrally located 180-kg crate. The platforms are supported by
the two-force members of negligible mass, as shown.
If the rack is subjected to a 900-N force at A, determine the forces in members CE, DE, and DF.

2 kN

D

5 kN

900 N

Problem 4/131

4/132 The support apparatus for a power line for a lightrapid-transit train is shown. If a tension of 500 lb
exists in cable EDF, determine the force F supported by the bolt at B.

C
A

D

36″
1.5 m

C

D
F 35°

35°

W

B

1.5 m

68″
14″

2m

A

20°

B

E

E

F
1.5 m

Problem 4/132

4/133 Determine the force in each member of the loaded
truss.

G

5 kips

5 kips

C

H

Problem 4/135

4/136 Determine the forces in members CH, AH, and CD
of the loaded truss.

5 kips

3 kN
B

10′

D

3 kN
D

1.5 kN
A

15′

15′

3 kN
1.5 kN

E

F
AB = BC = CD = DE
Problem 4/133

4/134 The specialty tool is used for installing and removing snap rings. Determine the spreading force applied at G and H if P ϭ50 N.

C
B

E
F

2m

1m
A

3m

3m
H
BC = CD = DE = EF
Problem 4/136

1m
G

Article 4/7
4/137 A frame designed to test the compressive strength
of concrete blocks is composed of the four pressure pads, the four compression links, and the
three outer links arranged in a square as shown.
Express the compressive force C acting on each
side of the square concrete block in terms of the
applied forces P.

Review Problems

227

4/139 If it is known that the center pin A supports onehalf of the vertical loading shown, determine the
force in member BF.
6 panels at 12 m
C

E

D

16 m
G

b

B

H

F

12 m

A
8 kN 8 kN 10 kN

10 kN 8 kN 8 kN

Problem 4/139
b

b

4/140 All two-force members of the loaded truss are of the
same length. Member BCD is a rigid beam. Determine the forces in members BG and CG in terms of
the load L.
P

P

B

C

D

Problem 4/137

4/138 The nose-wheel assembly is raised by the application of a torque M to link BC through the shaft at
B. If the arm and wheel AO have a combined
weight of 100 lb with center of gravity at G, ﬁnd
the value of M necessary to lift the wheel when D is
directly under B, at which position angle ␪ is 30Њ.

A

G

E

F

L

z

Problem 4/140

16″
B

4/141 Determine the forces in members AB, BI, and CI of
the simple truss. Note that all curved members are
two-force members.

M
20″

A

Arc of radius 50 m
C

θ

32″

I

G
20 m

20″
D

A

F
B

G
8″

H

C
L

O
15 m

15 m

D
L

E
L

20 m

15 m

Problem 4/141
Problem 4/138

L
15 m

228

Chapter 4

Structures

4/142 The structure of Prob. 4/141 is modiﬁed in that the
four curved members are replaced by the two members AIH and HGF. Instrumentation indicates the
tension in members CH and DH to be 0.5L each.
Determine the forces in members AB, BI, and CI.
Is the problem solvable without the information
about CH?

0.9 m
C

0.4 m
0.4 m
D
0.5 m

B

F
0.5 m
E

H

Arc of radius 50 m

G

I

0.9 m

y

z

20 m

A

x

F

A
B

D

E

L
15 m

C
L

L

L

15 m

20 m

15 m

1.2 m
F
15 m

Problem 4/142

4/143 The tree feller cuts off large trees near ground level
and then continues to grasp the trunk. Determine
the force in hydraulic cylinder AB for the position
shown if the tree weighs 6000 lb. Determine the required pressure on the 4.72-in.-diameter piston of
the cylinder.
0.6′

Problem 4/144

᭤4/145 The bar bender for forming reinforcing steel consists of the lever OAB hinged at O to the ﬁxed base
plate. The forming rollers at A, O, and C are all free
to rotate. For the 60Њ position shown, a force of
50 lb is required on the handle. Calculate the x- and
y-components of the force R exerted by the base
plate on the shaft of roller O for this position. (Suggestion: Analyze separate free-body diagrams of the
bent bar and of the lever and attached rollers. Observe that the force exerted by the bar on the roller
at O is in addition to the force R supplied by the
base plate.)

B
3.6′
A

50 lb
″
20

7.5′

6.8′

B

1′′

60°

2.4′

A

y
Problem 4/143

᭤4/144 Each of the landing struts for a planet exploration
spacecraft is designed as a space truss symmetrical
about the vertical x-z plane as shown. For a landing force F ϭ 2.2 kN, calculate the corresponding
force in member BE. The assumption of static
equilibrium for the truss is permissible if the mass
of the truss is very small. Assume equal loads in
the symmetrically placed members.

β
θ

A
3″

x

O

C

2″

0.5′′

2
3

1

O

0.5′′
C

Problem 4/145

1″
––
2

A–1 = 1.25″
O–2 = 0.75″
A– O = 3″
O– C = 2″
O– 3 = 1.5″

Article 4/7
᭤4/146 The lengthy boom of an overhead construction
crane, a portion of which is shown, is an example
of a periodic structure—one which is composed of
repeated and identical structural units. Use the
method of sections to ﬁnd the forces in members
FJ and GJ.
2m

1m

2m

K

Review Problems

229

*Computer-Oriented Problems
*4/148 The structural members support the 3-kN load
which may be applied at any angle ␪ from essentially
Ϫ90Њ to ϩ90Њ. The pin at A must be designed to support the maximum force transmitted to it. Plot the
force FA at A as a function of ␪ and determine its
maximum value and the corresponding angle ␪.

H
E
L
M
2m

B

300
mm

I
F

J
2m

G
2m

C

D
A

D
2m

400
mm

BC = BD = CD = 2 m

A
B

5000 kg

600
mm

Problem 4/146

᭤ 4/147 A space truss consists of two pyramids on identical
square bases in the horizontal x-y plane with common side DG. The truss is loaded at the vertex A by
the downward force L and is supported by the vertical reactions shown at its corners. All members
except the two base diagonals are of the same
length b. Take advantage of the two vertical planes
of symmetry and determine the forces in AB and
DA. (Note that link AB prevents the two pyramids
from hinging about DG.)

C

θ

600
mm

3 kN

Problem 4/148

* 4/149 For a given force P on the handle of the toggle
clamp the clamping force C increases to very large
values as the angle ␪ decreases. For P ϭ 30 lb determine the relationship between C and ␪ and plot
it as a function of ␪ from ␪ ϭ 2Њ to ␪ ϭ 30Њ. Assume
that the shaft slides freely in its guide.

P
6″

L

B

2″

b

2″

A
b

C

H

B

R2
G
b

F

b
R2

D

b
b

z

E
R1
y

x
Problem 4/147

θ

O

b
C

A

R1

Problem 4/149

230

Chapter 4

Structures

* 4/150 The “jaws-of-life” device of Prob. 4/88 is redrawn
here with its jaws open. The pressure behind the
piston P of area 20 in.2 is maintained at 500 lb /in.2
Calculate and plot the force R as a function of ␪ for
0 Յ ␪ Յ 45Њ, where R is the vertical force acting on
the wreckage as shown. Determine the maximum
value of R and the corresponding value of the jaw
angle. See the ﬁgure of Prob. 4/88 for dimensions
and the geometry associated with the condition
␪ ϭ 0. Note that link AB and its counterpart are
both horizontal in the ﬁgure for ␪ ϭ 0 but do not
remain horizontal as the jaws open.

* 4/152 Determine and plot the forces in all members of the
loaded simple truss as functions of the angle ␣ over
the range 0 Յ ␣ Յ 90Њ. State the minimum values
for the forces in members AC and CD and the values of ␣ at which these minima occur.
2m

A

B
30°

α

3 kN
C

R
3 kN

D
θ

P

A

Problem 4/152

θ

B
C

R
Problem 4/150

* 4/151 Determine and plot the forces in the three members of the simple truss for values of ␪ over the
range 0 Յ ␪ Յ 120Њ. What happens if ␪ exceeds 120Њ?
For the purposes of plotting, take tensile forces to
be positive. Determine the maximum tensile and
the maximum compressive force in each member.
θ

* 4/153 The uniform 30-kg ventilation door OAP is opened
by the mechanism shown. Plot the required force
in the cylinder DE as a function of the door opening angle ␪ over the range 0 Յ ␪ Յ ␪max, where ␪max
is the maximum opening. Determine the minimum
and maximum values of this force and the angles at
which these extremes occur. Note that the cylinder
is not horizontal when ␪ ϭ 0.

275

P = 4 kN

525

θ

O

A

A

P
B

300
B

30°

30°

E

D

C

100

C

Problem 4/151

350

400

AB = 300

CD = DB = 150

Dimensions in millimeters
Problem 4/153

Article 4/7
*4/154 The angle of the support surface at C can be varied
from 0 (vertical) to 90Њ (horizontal). (a) Plot the
force in member BC as a function of ␪ over this
range. Note any unusual conditions. (b) For what
value of ␪, if any, is the force in member BC zero?
(c) If member BC is designed to fail at a load of
1000 lb in either tension or compression, what is
the allowable range for the angle ␪?
B

A

Review Problems

* 4/156 The “jaws of life” device is used by rescuers to pry
apart wreckage. A pressure of 35 MPa (35(106) N/m2)
is developed behind the piston of 50-mm radius.
Begin by determining the prying force R, the force
in link AB, and the horizontal force reaction at C
for the condition shown on the left. Then develop
expressions for and plot those quantities as functions
of the jaw angle ␪ (shown on the right) over the range
0 Յ ␪ Յ 45Њ. State the minimum value of R and the
value of ␪ for which this extreme occurs.

6′

20 60

70

2.5′

100 lb

D
R

D
R

R

θ

θ

Problem 4/154

B
C

B

60
A 60
C

* 4/155 The machine shown is used to help load luggage
into airliners. The combined mass of the conveyor
and luggage is 100 kg with mass center at G. Determine and plot the force in the hydraulic cylinder as
a function of ␪ over the range 5Њ Յ ␪ Յ 30Њ and
state the maximum value over this range.

110
Dimensions in millimeters
Problem 4/156

2130 mm
G
E
B

C

θ

D

A

DE = 1945 mm

500 mm

1060 mm

1660 mm

CD = 1150 mm

Problem 4/155

R

210

C
θ

231

A

When forces are continuously distributed over a region of a structure, the cumulative effect of this distribution
must be determined. In the case of Hoover Dam, the water pressure is distributed over the area of the dam
and varies greatly with the depth of the water. For the Mike O’Callaghan–Pat Tillman Memorial Bridge, the
weights of the roadway and any supported vehicles are distributed along the length of the roadway.
© Barry Sweet/ZUMApress.com

5

Distributed
Forces
CHAPTER OUTLINE
5/1 Introduction

Section B Special Topics

Section A Centers of Mass and Centroids

5/6

Beams—External Effects

5/2 Center of Mass

5/7

Beams—Internal Effects

5/3 Centroids of Lines, Areas, and Volumes

5/8

Flexible Cables

5/4 Composite Bodies and Figures; Approximations

5/9

Fluid Statics

5/5 Theorems of Pappus

5/10 Chapter Review

5/1

Introduction

In the previous chapters we treated all forces as concentrated along
their lines of action and at their points of application. This treatment
provided a reasonable model for those forces. Actually, “concentrated”
forces do not exist in the exact sense, since every external force applied
mechanically to a body is distributed over a ﬁnite contact area, however
small.
The force exerted by the pavement on an automobile tire, for instance, is applied to the tire over its entire area of contact, Fig. 5/1a,
which may be appreciable if the tire is soft. When analyzing the forces
acting on the car as a whole, if the dimension b of the contact area is
negligible compared with the other pertinent dimensions, such as the
distance between wheels, then we may replace the actual distributed
contact forces by their resultant R treated as a concentrated force. Even
the force of contact between a hardened steel ball and its race in a
loaded ball bearing, Fig. 5/1b, is applied over a finite though extremely
small contact area. The forces applied to a two-force member of a truss,
Fig. 5/1c, are applied over an actual area of contact of the pin against
the hole and internally across the cut section as shown. In these and
other similar examples we may treat the forces as concentrated when
analyzing their external effects on bodies as a whole.

233

234

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces

b
R
(a)
Enlarged view
of contact

R
(b)

R
C

C

(b)
C

C
(c)

Figure 5/1

If, on the other hand, we want to ﬁnd the distribution of internal
forces in the material of the body near the contact location, where the
internal stresses and strains may be appreciable, then we must not
treat the load as concentrated but must consider the actual distribution.
This problem will not be discussed here because it requires a knowledge
of the properties of the material and belongs in more advanced treatments of the mechanics of materials and the theories of elasticity and
plasticity.
When forces are applied over a region whose dimensions are not
negligible compared with other pertinent dimensions, then we must account for the actual manner in which the force is distributed. We do
this by summing the effects of the distributed force over the entire region using mathematical integration. This requires that we know the
intensity of the force at any location. There are three categories of such
problems.
(1) Line Distribution. When a force is distributed along a line, as in
the continuous vertical load supported by a suspended cable, Fig. 5/2a,
the intensity w of the loading is expressed as force per unit length of
line, newtons per meter (N/m) or pounds per foot (lb/ft).
(2) Area Distribution. When a force is distributed over an area, as
with the hydraulic pressure of water against the inner face of a section
of dam, Fig. 5/2b, the intensity is expressed as force per unit area. This
intensity is called pressure for the action of ﬂuid forces and stress for the
internal distribution of forces in solids. The basic unit for pressure or
stress in SI is the newton per square meter (N/m2), which is also called
the pascal (Pa). This unit, however, is too small for most applications
(6895 Pa ϭ 1 lb/in.2). The kilopascal (kPa), which equals 103 Pa, is more
commonly used for ﬂuid pressure, and the megapascal, which equals 106
Pa, is used for stress. In the U.S. customary system of units, both ﬂuid
pressure and mechanical stress are commonly expressed in pounds per
square inch (lb/in.2).
(3) Volume Distribution. A force which is distributed over the volume of a body is called a body force. The most common body force is the
force of gravitational attraction, which acts on all elements of mass in a
body. The determination of the forces on the supports of the heavy cantilevered structure in Fig. 5/2c, for example, would require accounting
for the distribution of gravitational force throughout the structure. The
intensity of gravitational force is the speciﬁc weight ␳g, where ␳ is the
density (mass per unit volume) and g is the acceleration due to gravity.
The units for ␳g are (kg/m3)(m/s2) ϭ N/m3 in SI units and lb/ft3 or lb/in.3
in the U.S. customary system.
The body force due to the gravitational attraction of the earth
(weight) is by far the most commonly encountered distributed force.
Section A of this chapter treats the determination of the point in a body
through which the resultant gravitational force acts, and discusses the
associated geometric properties of lines, areas, and volumes. Section B
treats distributed forces which act on and in beams and ﬂexible cables
and distributed forces which ﬂuids exert on exposed surfaces.

Article 5/2

Center of Mass

235

w

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 5/2

SECTION A CENTERS OF MASS AND CENTROIDS
5/2

Center of Mass

Consider a three-dimensional body of any size and shape, having
a mass m. If we suspend the body, as shown in Fig. 5/3, from any
point such as A, the body will be in equilibrium under the action of
the tension in the cord and the resultant W of the gravitational forces
acting on all particles of the body. This resultant is clearly collinear
with the cord. Assume that we mark its position by drilling a hypothetical hole of negligible size along its line of action. We repeat the
experiment by suspending the body from other points such as B and
C, and in each instance we mark the line of action of the resultant
force. For all practical purposes these lines of action will be concurrent at a single point G, which is called the center of gravity of the
body.
An exact analysis, however, would account for the slightly differing
directions of the gravity forces for the various particles of the body, because those forces converge toward the center of attraction of the earth.
Also, because the particles are at different distances from the earth, the
intensity of the force ﬁeld of the earth is not exactly constant over the
body. As a result, the lines of action of the gravity-force resultants in
the experiments just described will not be quite concurrent, and therefore no unique center of gravity exists in the exact sense. This is of no
practical importance as long as we deal with bodies whose dimensions
are small compared with those of the earth. We therefore assume a uniform and parallel force ﬁeld due to the gravitational attraction of the
earth, and this assumption results in the concept of a unique center of
gravity.

Determining the Center of Gravity
To determine mathematically the location of the center of gravity of
any body, Fig. 5/4a, we apply the principle of moments (see Art. 2/6) to
the parallel system of gravitational forces. The moment of the resultant
gravitational force W about any axis equals the sum of the moments

A B
C

B

A
G

C

B
A

C
G

W

W

W

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 5/3

236

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces
z

z

dm

G
dW

_
x

x
y

W
r _
r

y

z

G

y

_
z

_
y
x

x

(a)

(b)

Figure 5/4

about the same axis of the gravitational forces dW acting on all particles
treated as inﬁnitesimal elements of the body. The resultant of the gravitational forces acting on all elements is the weight of the body and is
given by the sum W ϭ ͐ dW. If we apply the moment principle about the
y-axis, for example, the moment about this axis of the elemental weight
is x dW, and the sum of these moments for all elements of the body is
͐ x dW. This sum of moments must equal W x, the moment of the sum.
Thus, xW ϭ ͐ x dW.
With similar expressions for the other two components, we may express the coordinates of the center of gravity G as

xϭ

͵ x dW
W

yϭ

͵ y dW
W

zϭ

͵ z dW
W

(5/1a)

To visualize the physical moments of the gravity forces appearing in the
third equation, we may reorient the body and attached axes so that the
z-axis is horizontal. It is essential to recognize that the numerator of
each of these expressions represents the sum of the moments, whereas
the product of W and the corresponding coordinate of G represents the
moment of the sum. This moment principle ﬁnds repeated use throughout mechanics.
With the substitution of W ϭ mg and dW ϭ g dm, the expressions
for the coordinates of the center of gravity become

xϭ

͵ x dm
m

yϭ

͵ y dm
m

zϭ

͵ z dm
m

(5/1b)

Equations 5/1b may be expressed in vector form with the aid of Fig.
5/4b, in which the elemental mass and the mass center G are located by

Article 5/2

Center of Mass

their respective position vectors r ϭ xi ϩ yj ϩ zk and r ϭ x i ϩ y j ϩ zk.
Thus, Eqs. 5/1b are the components of the single vector equation

rϭ

͵ r dm

(5/2)

m

The density ␳ of a body is its mass per unit volume. Thus, the mass
of a differential element of volume dV becomes dm ϭ ␳ dV. If ␳ is not
constant throughout the body but can be expressed as a function of the
coordinates of the body, we must account for this variation when calculating the numerators and denominators of Eqs. 5/1b. We may then
write these expressions as

xϭ

͵ x␳ dV
͵ ␳ dV

yϭ

͵ y␳ dV
͵ ␳ dV

zϭ

͵ z␳ dV
͵ ␳ dV

(5/3)

Center of Mass versus Center of Gravity
Equations 5/1b, 5/2, and 5/3 are independent of gravitational effects
since g no longer appears. They therefore deﬁne a unique point in the
body which is a function solely of the distribution of mass. This point is
called the center of mass, and clearly it coincides with the center of gravity as long as the gravity ﬁeld is treated as uniform and parallel.
It is meaningless to speak of the center of gravity of a body which is
removed from the gravitational ﬁeld of the earth, since no gravitational
forces would act on it. The body would, however, still have its unique
center of mass. We will usually refer henceforth to the center of mass
rather than to the center of gravity. Also, the center of mass has a special signiﬁcance in calculating the dynamic response of a body to unbalanced forces. This class of problems is discussed at length in Vol. 2
Dynamics.
In most problems the calculation of the position of the center of
mass may be simpliﬁed by an intelligent choice of reference axes. In general the axes should be placed so as to simplify the equations of the
boundaries as much as possible. Thus, polar coordinates will be useful
for bodies with circular boundaries.
Another important clue may be taken from considerations of symmetry. Whenever there exists a line or plane of symmetry in a homogeneous body, a coordinate axis or plane should be chosen to coincide with
this line or plane. The center of mass will always lie on such a line or
plane, since the moments due to symmetrically located elements will always cancel, and the body may be considered composed of pairs of these
elements. Thus, the center of mass G of the homogeneous right-circular
cone of Fig. 5/5a will lie somewhere on its central axis, which is a line of
symmetry. The center of mass of the half right-circular cone lies on its
plane of symmetry, Fig. 5/5b. The center of mass of the half ring in Fig.
5/5c lies in both of its planes of symmetry and therefore is situated on

G

G

(a)

(b)

A
G
B

(c)

Figure 5/5

237

238

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces

line AB. It is easiest to ﬁnd the location of G by using symmetry when it
exists.

5/3

Centroids of Lines, Areas, and Volumes

When the density ␳ of a body is uniform throughout, it will be a
constant factor in both the numerators and denominators of Eqs. 5/3
and will therefore cancel. The remaining expressions deﬁne a purely
geometrical property of the body, since any reference to its mass properties has disappeared. The term centroid is used when the calculation
concerns a geometrical shape only. When speaking of an actual physical
body, we use the term center of mass. If the density is uniform throughout the body, the positions of the centroid and center of mass are identical, whereas if the density varies, these two points will, in general, not
coincide.
The calculation of centroids falls within three distinct categories,
depending on whether we can model the shape of the body involved as a
line, an area, or a volume.
z
dL
L

y

C
z

–
z
–
x
–
y

x
y

xϭ
x

x
y

C
–
z

A

y

xϭ

–
x
–
y

L

yϭ

͵ y dL
L

zϭ

͵ z dL
L

(5/4)

(2) Areas. When a body of density ␳ has a small but constant thickness t, we can model it as a surface area A, Fig. 5/7. The mass of an element becomes dm ϭ ␳t dA. Again, if ␳ and t are constant over the entire
area, the coordinates of the center of mass of the body also become the
coordinates of the centroid C of the surface area, and from Eqs. 5/1b the
coordinates may be written

z
dA

͵ x dL

Note that, in general, the centroid C will not lie on the line. If the rod
lies on a single plane, such as the x-y plane, only two coordinates need to
be calculated.

Figure 5/6

z

(1) Lines. For a slender rod or wire of length L, cross-sectional area
A, and density ␳, Fig. 5/6, the body approximates a line segment, and
dm ϭ ␳A dL. If ␳ and A are constant over the length of the rod, the coordinates of the center of mass also become the coordinates of the centroid
C of the line segment, which, from Eqs. 5/1b, may be written

͵ x dA
A

yϭ

͵ y dA
A

zϭ

͵ z dA
A

(5/5)

t

x

Figure 5/7

The numerators in Eqs. 5/5 are called the first moments of area.* If the
surface is curved, as illustrated in Fig. 5/7 with the shell segment, all
three coordinates will be involved. The centroid C for the curved surface will in general not lie on the surface. If the area is a flat surface in,
*Second moments of areas (moments of ﬁrst moments) appear later in our discussion of
area moments of inertia in Appendix A.

Article 5/3

Centroids of Lines, Areas, and Volumes

239

say, the x-y plane, only the coordinates of C in that plane need to be
calculated.
(3) Volumes. For a general body of volume V and density ␳, the element has a mass dm ϭ ␳ dV. The density ␳ cancels if it is constant over
the entire volume, and the coordinates of the center of mass also become
the coordinates of the centroid C of the body. From Eqs. 5/3 or 5/1b they
become

xϭ

͵ x dV

yϭ

V

͵ y dV

zϭ

V

͵ z dV
V

(5/6)

KEY CONCEPTS
Choice of Element for Integration
The principal difﬁculty with a theory often lies not in its concepts
but in the procedures for applying it. With mass centers and centroids
the concept of the moment principle is simple enough; the difﬁcult steps
are the choice of the differential element and setting up the integrals.
The following ﬁve guidelines will be useful.

(1) Order of Element. Whenever possible, a ﬁrst-order differential
element should be selected in preference to a higher-order element so
that only one integration will be required to cover the entire ﬁgure.
Thus, in Fig. 5/8a a ﬁrst-order horizontal strip of area dA ϭ l dy will require only one integration with respect to y to cover the entire ﬁgure.
The second-order element dx dy will require two integrations, ﬁrst with
respect to x and second with respect to y, to cover the ﬁgure. As a further
example, for the solid cone in Fig. 5/8b we choose a ﬁrst-order element in
the form of a circular slice of volume dV ϭ ␲r2 dy. This choice requires
only one integration, and thus is preferable to choosing a third-order element dV ϭ dx dy dz, which would require three awkward integrations.
(2) Continuity. Whenever possible, we choose an element which can
be integrated in one continuous operation to cover the ﬁgure. Thus, the
horizontal strip in Fig. 5/8a would be preferable to the vertical strip in
Fig. 5/9, which, if used, would require two separate integrals because of
the discontinuity in the expression for the height of the strip at x ϭ x1.
(3) Discarding Higher-Order Terms. Higher-order terms may always be dropped compared with lower-order terms (see Art. 1/7). Thus,
the vertical strip of area under the curve in Fig. 5/10 is given by the
y
y

dy

y
x
x1

Figure 5/9

x

dx

Figure 5/10

y

y

l

dx

dy

dy
x

x

(a)
y

y

dy
r
x
z
(b)

Figure 5/8

240

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces
y
y

2

x

=

ky

r

θ

x
(a)

x
(b)

Figure 5/11
1

ﬁrst-order term dA ϭ y dx, and the second-order triangular area 2dx dy
is discarded. In the limit, of course, there is no error.

(4) Choice of Coordinates. As a general rule, we choose the coordinate system which best matches the boundaries of the ﬁgure. Thus, the
boundaries of the area in Fig. 5/11a are most easily described in rectangular coordinates, whereas the boundaries of the circular sector of Fig.
5/11b are best suited to polar coordinates.
(5) Centroidal Coordinate of Element. When a ﬁrst- or secondorder differential element is chosen, it is essential to use the coordinate
of the centroid of the element for the moment arm in expressing the moment of the differential element. Thus, for the horizontal strip of area in
Fig. 5/12a, the moment of dA about the y-axis is xc dA, where xc is the
x-coordinate of the centroid C of the element. Note that xc is not the x
which describes either boundary of the area. In the y-direction for this
element the moment arm yc of the centroid of the element is the same,
in the limit, as the y-coordinates of the two boundaries.
As a second example, consider the solid half-cone of Fig. 5/12b with
the semicircular slice of differential thickness as the element of volume.
The moment arm for the element in the x-direction is the distance xc to
the centroid of the face of the element and not the x-distance to the
boundary of the element. On the other hand, in the z-direction the moment arm zc of the centroid of the element is the same as the z-coordinate
of the element.
With these examples in mind, we rewrite Eqs. 5/5 and 5/6 in the form

xϭ

͵ x dA
c

yϭ

A

͵ y dA
c

A

y

zϭ

͵ z dA
c

(5/5a)

A

x
zc

xc

C

yc

C
x

y

(a)

z
(b)

Figure 5/12

xc

Article 5/3

Centroids of Lines, Areas, and Volumes

and

xϭ

͵ x dV
c

V

yϭ

͵ y dV
c

V

zϭ

͵ z dV
c

V

(5/6a)

It is essential to recognize that the subscript c serves as a reminder that
the moment arms appearing in the numerators of the integral expressions for moments are always the coordinates of the centroids of the
particular elements chosen.
At this point you should be certain to understand clearly the principle of moments, which was introduced in Art. 2/4. You should recognize
the physical meaning of this principle as it is applied to the system of
parallel weight forces depicted in Fig. 5/4a. Keep in mind the equivalence between the moment of the resultant weight W and the sum (integral) of the moments of the elemental weights dW, to avoid mistakes in
setting up the necessary mathematics. Recognition of the principle of
moments will help in obtaining the correct expression for the moment
arm xc, yc, or zc of the centroid of the chosen differential element.
Keeping in mind the physical picture of the principle of moments,
we will recognize that Eqs. 5/4, 5/5, and 5/6, which are geometric relationships, are descriptive also of homogeneous physical bodies, because
the density ␳ cancels. If the density of the body in question is not constant but varies throughout the body as some function of the coordinates, then it will not cancel from the numerator and denominator of
the mass-center expressions. In this event, we must use Eqs. 5/3 as explained earlier.

Sample Problems 5/1 through 5/5 which follow have been carefully
chosen to illustrate the application of Eqs. 5/4, 5/5, and 5/6 for calculating the location of the centroid for line segments (slender rods), areas
(thin ﬂat plates), and volumes (homogeneous solids). The ﬁve integration considerations listed above are illustrated in detail in these sample
problems.
Section C/10 of Appendix C contains a table of integrals which includes those needed for the problems in this and subsequent chapters. A
summary of the centroidal coordinates for some of the commonly used
shapes is given in Tables D/3 and D/4, Appendix D.

241

242

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces

SAMPLE PROBLEM 5/1
Centroid of a circular arc. Locate the centroid of a circular arc as shown in
the ﬁgure.

r

α
α

Choosing the axis of symmetry as the x-axis makes y ϭ 0. A differential element of arc has the length dL ϭ r d␪ expressed in polar coordinates,
ᕡ and the x-coordinate of the element is r cos ␪.
Applying the ﬁrst of Eqs. 5/4 and substituting L ϭ 2␣r give

Solution.

[Lx ϭ

͵ x dL]

(2␣r)x ϭ
2␣rx ϭ

͵

␣

Ϫ␣

2r2

y

(r cos ␪) r d␪

C

r cos θ

sin ␣

dθ

r sin ␣
Ans.
xϭ ␣
For a semicircular arc 2␣ ϭ ␲, which gives x ϭ 2r/␲. By symmetry we see
immediately that this result also applies to the quarter-circular arc when the
measurement is made as shown.

r dθ

α

θ
x

α
r

Helpful Hint

ᕡ It should be perfectly evident that polar coordinates are preferable to rectangular coordinates to express the length of a circular arc.

C

C
2r/π
r

SAMPLE PROBLEM 5/2

r

y

Centroid of a triangular area. Determine the distance h from the base of a
triangle of altitude h to the centroid of its area.
dy
h

Solution.

The x-axis is taken to coincide with the base. A differential strip of

x

ᕡ area dA ϭ x dy is chosen. By similar triangles x/(h Ϫ y) ϭ b/h. Applying the sec-

y

ond of Eqs. 5/5a gives
[Ay ϭ
and

͵ y dA]
c

x

bh
yϭ
2

͵

h

0

y

b(h Ϫ y)
h
yϭ

h
3

b

dy ϭ

bh2
6
Ans.

This same result holds with respect to either of the other two sides of the
triangle considered a new base with corresponding new altitude. Thus, the centroid lies at the intersection of the medians, since the distance of this point from
any side is one-third the altitude of the triangle with that side considered the
base.

Helpful Hint

ᕡ We save one integration here by
using the ﬁrst-order element of area.
Recognize that dA must be expressed
in terms of the integration variable
y; hence, x ϭ ƒ( y) is required.

Article 5/3

Centroids of Lines, Areas, and Volumes

243

SAMPLE PROBLEM 5/3
Centroid of the area of a circular sector. Locate the centroid of the area

r

of a circular sector with respect to its vertex.
α
α

Solution I. The x-axis is chosen as the axis of symmetry, and y is therefore
automatically zero. We may cover the area by moving an element in the form of
a partial circular ring, as shown in the ﬁgure, from the center to the outer periphery. The radius of the ring is r0 and its thickness is dr0, so that its area is
ᕡ dA ϭ 2r0␣ dr0.
The x-coordinate to the centroid of the element from Sample Problem 5/1 is
ᕢ xc ϭ r0 sin ␣/␣, where r0 replaces r in the formula. Thus, the ﬁrst of Eqs. 5/5a
gives
[Ax ϭ

͵ x dA]
c

2␣
(␲r2)x ϭ
2␲

y
r

α

͵ ΂r sin ␣΃(2r ␣ dr )
␣
r

0

0

r2␣x ϭ 2r 3 sin ␣
3
xϭ

2 r sin ␣
3 ␣

Ans.

The area may also be covered by swinging a triangle of differential area about the vertex and through the total angle of the sector. This triangle,
shown in the illustration, has an area dA ϭ (r/2)(r d␪), where higher-order terms
are neglected. From Sample Problem 5/2 the centroid of the triangular element
of area is two-thirds of its altitude from its vertex, so that the x-coordinate to the
2
centroid of the element is xc ϭ 3 r cos ␪. Applying the ﬁrst of Eqs. 5/5a gives

͵ x dA]
c

(r2␣)x ϭ

͵

␣

Ϫ␣

(2 r cos ␪)(1 r2 d␪)
3
2

xϭ

2 r sin ␣
3 ␣

Solution I

Helpful Hints

ᕡ Note carefully that we must distinguish between the variable r0 and
the constant r.

ᕢ Be careful not to use r0 as the centroidal coordinate for the element.

y
xc = 2 r cos θ
–
3

r2␣x ϭ 2r3 sin ␣
3
and as before

x

r0 sin α
xc = ——–––
α

Solution II.

[Ax ϭ

dr0

r0

α

0

0

C

Ans.

For a semicircular area 2␣ ϭ ␲, which gives x ϭ 4r/3␲. By symmetry we see
immediately that this result also applies to the quarter-circular area where the
measurement is made as shown.
It should be noted that, if we had chosen a second-order element r0 dr0 d␪,
one integration with respect to ␪ would yield the ring with which Solution I
began. On the other hand, integration with respect to r0 initially would give the
triangular element with which Solution II began.

dθ

α

θ

α

x

r

Solution II

4r/3π
C
C
r

r

244

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces

SAMPLE PROBLEM 5/4

y
x = ky3

3

Locate the centroid of the area under the curve x ϭ ky from x ϭ 0 to x ϭ a.

–
x

Solution I. A vertical element of area dA ϭ y dx is chosen as shown in the ﬁgure. The x-coordinate of the centroid is found from the ﬁrst of Eqs. 5/5a. Thus,

ᕡ [Ax ϭ

͵ x dA]

x

c

͵

a

0

y dx ϭ

͵

–
y

a

xy dx

0

3ab
3a2b
xϭ
4
7

4

x ϭ 7a

y
b

Ans.

x = ky3

In the solution for y from the second of Eqs. 5/5a, the coordinate to the
centroid of the rectangular element is yc ϭ y/2, where y is the height of the strip
governed by the equation of the curve x ϭ ky3. Thus, the moment principle becomes

͵ y dA]

3ab
yϭ
4

c

x

a

Substituting y ϭ (x/k)1/3 and k ϭ a/b3 and integrating give

[Ay ϭ

b

C

y
y
yc = –
2

y
͵ ΂2΃ y dx
a

0

x

x

a

dx

Substituting y ϭ b(x/a)1/3 and integrating give
3ab2
3ab
yϭ
4
10

2

y ϭ 5b

Ans.
y

The horizontal element of area shown in the lower ﬁgure may be
employed in place of the vertical element. The x-coordinate to the centroid of the
rectangular element is seen to be xc ϭ x ϩ 1(a Ϫ x) ϭ (a ϩ x)/2, which is simply
2
the average of the coordinates a and x of the ends of the strip. Hence,

Solution II.

[Ax ϭ

͵ x dA]
c

x

͵

b

0

͵ ΂a ϩ x΃(a Ϫ x) dy
2

b

a+x
xc = ––––
2
x = ky3
dy

b

(a Ϫ x) dy ϭ

0

x

a–x

y

The value of y is found from
[Ay ϭ

͵ y dA]
c

y

͵

b

0

(a Ϫ x) dy ϭ

͵

b

0

a

y(a Ϫ x) dy

where yc ϭ y for the horizontal strip. The evaluation of these integrals will check
the previous results for x and y.

x

Helpful Hint

ᕡ Note that xc ϭ x for the vertical
element.

Article 5/3

Centroids of Lines, Areas, and Volumes

245

SAMPLE PROBLEM 5/5
Locate the centroid of the volume of a hemisphere
of radius r with respect to its base.

Hemispherical volume.

With the axes chosen as shown in the ﬁgure, x ϭ z ϭ 0 by symmetry. The most convenient element is a circular slice of thickness dy parallel to
the x-z plane. Since the hemisphere intersects the y-z plane in the circle y2 ϩ z2 ϭ
r2, the radius of the circular slice is z ϭ ϩΊr2 Ϫ y2. The volume of the elemental
slice becomes

Solution I.

ᕡ

z

y2 + z2 = r2

z

dV ϭ ␲(r2 Ϫ y2) dy

y
r

The second of Eqs. 5/6a requires
[V y ϭ

͵ y dV]
c

y

͵

r

0

␲(r2 Ϫ y2) dy ϭ

͵

dy

r

0

y␲(r2 Ϫ y2) dy

yc = y

x

where yc ϭ y. Integrating gives
Solution I
2 3
1 4
3 ␲r y ϭ 4 ␲r

y ϭ 3r
8

Ans.
z

Alternatively we may use for our differential element a cylindrical
shell of length y, radius z, and thickness dz, as shown in the lower ﬁgure. By expanding the radius of the shell from zero to r, we cover the entire volume. By
symmetry the centroid of the elemental shell lies at its center, so that yc ϭ y/2.
The volume of the element is dV ϭ (2␲z dz)(y). Expressing y in terms of z from
the equation of the circle gives y ϭ ϩΊr2 Ϫ z2. Using the value of 2 ␲r3 computed
3
in Solution I for the volume of the hemisphere and substituting in the second of
Eqs. 5/6a give us

y

Solution II.

[V y ϭ

͵ y dV]
c

dz

yc = y/2

z
y
r

͵ Ίr 2Ϫ z (2␲zΊr Ϫ z ) dz
␲r
ϭ ͵ ␲(r z Ϫ z ) dz ϭ
4

(2␲r3)y ϭ
3

r

2

2

2

2

x

0

r

2

3

4

0

y ϭ 3r
8

Solution II

Ans.
z

Solutions I and II are of comparable use since each involves an element of
simple shape and requires integration with respect to one variable only.
r

dθ

As an alternative, we could use the angle ␪ as our variable with
limits of 0 and ␲/2. The radius of either element would become r sin ␪, whereas
the thickness of the slice in Solution I would be dy ϭ (r d␪) sin ␪ and that of the
shell in Solution II would be dz ϭ (r d␪) cos ␪. The length of the shell would be
y ϭ r cos ␪.

Solution III.

r dθ

θ

y

Solution III

Helpful Hint

ᕡ Can you identify the higher-order element of volume which is omitted
from the expression for dV?

246

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces
5/3 Specify the x-, y-, and z-coordinates of the mass center of the homogeneous semicylinder.

PROBLEMS
Introductory Problems

y

5/1 With your pencil, make a dot on the position of your
best visual estimate of the centroid of the triangular
area. Check the position of your estimate by referring
to the results of Sample Problem 5/2 and to Table
D/3.

360
mm
120
mm

10

x

z

8

Problem 5/3

6

5/4 Specify the x-, y-, and z-coordinates of the mass center
of the quadrant of the homogeneous solid cylinder.

4

240 mm
z
y

2
120
mm
0
0

2

4

6

8

10

Problem 5/1
x

5/2 With your pencil, make a dot on the position of your
best visual estimate of the centroid of the area of the
circular sector. Check your estimate by using the results of Sample Problem 5/3.
y

Problem 5/4

5/5 A uniform semicircular rod of radius r is supported in
a bearing at its upper end and is free to swing in the
vertical plane. Calculate the angle ␪ made by the diameter with the vertical for the equilibrium position.

O
θ

200 mm

30°

30°

x

r

Problem 5/2

Problem 5/5

Article 5/3
5/6 Determine the y-coordinate of the centroid of the area
by direct integration.

Problems

247

5/9 Determine the x- and y-coordinates of the centroid of
the shaded area.
y

y

x3
y=1+ —
8

R
R/2

x
1

Problem 5/6

5/7 Determine the y-coordinate of the centroid of the
shaded area. Check your result for the special case
a ϭ 0.
y

0

0

1

x

2

Problem 5/9

5/10 Determine the coordinates of the centroid of the
shaded area.
y

h

b
a

60°

60°

x
x = ky2

a

Problem 5/7

5/8 Determine the x- and y-coordinates of the centroid of
the trapezoidal area.
x
y

Problem 5/10

5/11 Determine the coordinates of the centroid of the
shaded area.
y

a

πx
y = b sin —–
2a

b
h

x

Problem 5/8

b

a

Problem 5/11

x

248

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces

5/12 Determine the x- and y-coordinates of the centroid
of the shaded area.

Representative Problems
5/15 Locate the centroid of the shaded area shown.

y

y

3

x

0

a

x2
y = ––– – 4
4

x

a
2

–3
Problem 5/12

–4

5/13 Determine the coordinates of the centroid of the
shaded area.

Problem 5/15

5/16 Determine the x- and y-coordinates of the centroid
of the trapezoidal area.

y

y
x = ky2

a
a

x

b

h

Problem 5/13

5/14 Find the distance z from the vertex of the rightcircular cone to the centroid of its volume.

x

b
Problem 5/16

5/17 Locate the centroid of the shaded area.

–
z

y

h
C

y2
x=a 1– —
–
b2

(

)

b
Problem 5/14

a
Problem 5/17

x

Article 5/3
5/18 Determine the coordinates of the centroid of the
shaded area.
y

Problems

249

5/21 Determine the x-coordinate of the mass center of
the tapered steel rod of length L where the diameter
at the large end is twice the diameter at the small
end.

b
y

L
x

b
––
2

Dia. = 2D
Dia. = D

y = kx2
0

a

0

Problem 5/21

x

5/22 Determine the x- and y-coordinates of the centroid
of the shaded area.

Problem 5/18

y

5/19 The mass per unit length of the slender rod varies
with position according to ␳ ϭ ␳0(1 Ϫ x /2), where x is
in feet. Determine the location of the center of mass
of the rod.

a

y = k2 x
a
1′

x

y = k1x3
x
Problem 5/19

Problem 5/22

5/20 Calculate the coordinates of the centroid of the segment of the circular area.

5/23 Determine the x- and y-coordinates of the centroid
of the shaded area shown.
y

y

x 2 y2
— + —=1
a2 b2

b
a
x
Problem 5/20

a
Problem 5/23

x

250

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces

5/24 Locate the centroid of the area shown in the ﬁgure
by direct integration. (Caution: Observe carefully the
proper sign of the radical involved.)
y

5/27 If the shaded area of Prob. 5/26 is rotated 360Њ
about the y-axis, determine the y-coordinate of the
centroid of the resulting volume.
5/28 Determine the x- and y-coordinates of the centroid
of the shaded area.
y

a

a

a
—
2

x
Problem 5/24

x

5/25 Use the results of Sample Problem 5/3 to compute
the coordinates of the mass center of the portion of
the solid homogeneous cylinder shown.
z

Problem 5/28

5/29 Determine the y-coordinate of the centroid of the
shaded area.
y

6′′

a
10′′
a
2

x

y
45°

Problem 5/25

5/26 Determine the y-coordinate of the centroid of the
shaded area shown.
y

45°

x

Problem 5/29

5/30 Determine the z-coordinate of the centroid of the
volume generated by revolving the shaded area
around the z-axis through 360Њ.

b
z
Parabolic

a

a

b
––
5
0

r
a

0
Problem 5/26

x

Problem 5/30

Article 5/3
5/31 The ﬁgure represents a ﬂat piece of sheet metal
symmetrical about axis A-A and having a parabolic
upper boundary. Choose your own coordinates and
calculate the distance h from the base to the center
of gravity of the piece.

Problems

251

5/34 Determine the x-coordinate of the centroid of the
solid spherical segment. Evaluate your expression
for h ϭ R/4 and h ϭ 0.
y
h

A

3′′

x

R
O

2′′
3′′
A
Problem 5/34
Problem 5/31

5/32 Locate the centroid of the shaded area between the
ellipse and the circle.
y

5/35 Determine the x-coordinate of the mass center of
the portion of the spherical shell of uniform but
small thickness.
y

b

b

R
—
4

3R
–—
4

x

a

x
Problem 5/32

5/33 Calculate the distance h measured from the base to
the centroid of the volume of the frustum of the
right-circular cone.
y
Problem 5/35

h
h
—
2

r
z
Problem 5/33

252

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces

5/36 The thickness of the triangular plate varies linearly
with y from a value t0 along its base y ϭ 0 to 2t0 at
y ϭ h. Determine the y-coordinate of the center of
mass of the plate.
y

5/39 Determine the y-coordinate of the centroid of the
volume generated by revolving the shaded area of
the right triangle about the z-axis through 90Њ as
shown in the ﬁgure.
y

2t0

h
h
h
x

b

x
t0
b

Problem 5/36
z

5/37 Locate the mass center of the homogeneous solid
body whose volume is determined by revolving the
shaded area through 360Њ about the z-axis.

Problem 5/39

᭤5/40 Determine the z-coordinate of the mass center of the
homogeneous quarter-spherical shell, which has a
radius r.

r
300 mm

z
200 mm

y

r = kz3
0

z

0

r

x
Problem 5/40
Problem 5/37

5/38 The homogeneous slender rod has a uniform cross
section and is bent into the shape shown. Calculate
the y-coordinate of the mass center of the rod.
(Reminder: A differential arc length is dL ϭ
Ί(dx)2 ϩ (dy)2 ϭ Ί1 ϩ (dx/dy)2 dy.)
y

᭤5/41 Determine the y-coordinate of the centroid of the
plane area shown. Set h ϭ 0 in your result and compare with the result y ϭ 4a for a full semicircular
3␲
area (see Sample Problem 5/3 and Table D/3). Also
a
evaluate your result for the conditions h ϭ and
4
a
hϭ .
2
y

x = ky2
100 mm
a
h
x
100 mm
Problem 5/38

x
Problem 5/41

Article 5/3
᭤5/42 The thickness of the semicircular plate varies
linearly with y from a value 2t0 along its base y ϭ 0
to t0 at y ϭ a. Determine the y-coordinate of the
mass center of the plate.

Problems

253

᭤5/45 Determine the x-coordinate of the mass center of the
cylindrical shell of small uniform thickness.

2R
y

t0
R

a
x
2t0

x

Problem 5/42
4R

᭤5/43 Determine the coordinates of the centroid of the volume obtained by revolving the shaded area about the
z-axis through the 90Њ angle.
Problem 5/45
z

᭤5/46 Determine the x- and y-coordinates of the centroid
of the volume generated by rotating the shaded
area about the z-axis through 90Њ.

a
a

x

z

y

Problem 5/43

a

y

᭤5/44 Determine the x-coordinate of the mass center of the
solid homogeneous body shown.

2R
x
R

Problem 5/46

x
4R

Problem 5/44

254

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces

5/4

Composite Bodies and Figures;
Approximations

When a body or ﬁgure can be conveniently divided into several parts
whose mass centers are easily determined, we use the principle of moments and treat each part as a ﬁnite element of the whole. Such a body is
illustrated schematically in Fig. 5/13. Its parts have masses m1, m2, m3
with the respective mass-center coordinates x1, x2, x3 in the x-direction.
The moment principle gives
(m1 ϩ m2 ϩ m3)X ϭ m1x1 ϩ m2 x2 ϩ m3 x3
where X is the x-coordinate of the center of mass of the whole. Similar
relations hold for the other two coordinate directions.
We generalize, then, for a body of any number of parts and express
the sums in condensed form to obtain the mass-center coordinates

Xϭ

Σmx
Σm

Yϭ

Σmy
Σm

Zϭ

Σmz
Σm

(5/7)

Analogous relations hold for composite lines, areas, and volumes, where
the m’s are replaced by L’s, A’s, and V’s, respectively. Note that if a hole
or cavity is considered one of the component parts of a composite body
or ﬁgure, the corresponding mass represented by the cavity or hole is
treated as a negative quantity.

An Approximation Method
In practice the boundaries of an area or volume might not be expressible in terms of simple geometrical shapes or as shapes which can be
represented mathematically. For such cases we must resort to a method
of approximation. As an example, consider the problem of locating the

–
x3
–
x2
–
x1
G2

G

G1

G3
m2

m1

m3

–
X

Figure 5/13

Article 5/4

Composite Bodies and Figures; Approximations

centroid C of the irregular area shown in Fig. 5/14. The area is divided
into strips of width ⌬x and variable height h. The area A of each strip,
such as the one shown in red, is h ⌬x and is multiplied by the coordinates xc and yc of its centroid to obtain the moments of the element of
area. The sum of the moments for all strips divided by the total area of
the strips will give the corresponding centroidal coordinate. A systematic tabulation of the results will permit an orderly evaluation of the
total area ΣA, the sums ΣAxc and ΣAyc, and the centroidal coordinates
xϭ

ΣAxc

yϭ

ΣA

ΣA

Irregular Volumes
To locate the centroid of an irregular volume, we may reduce the
problem to one of locating the centroid of an area. Consider the volume
shown in Fig. 5/15, where the magnitudes A of the cross-sectional areas
normal to the x-direction are plotted against x as shown. A vertical strip
of area under the curve is A ⌬x, which equals the corresponding element
of volume ⌬V. Thus, the area under the plotted curve represents the volume of the body, and the x-coordinate of the centroid of the area under
the curve is given by
Σ(A ⌬x)xc

which equals

ΣA ⌬x

xϭ

for the centroid of the actual volume.

–
x
ΔV = A Δ x
A

G

x

Δx

x
–
x
xc
A

A

C

Δx

Figure 5/15

–
x
xc

h

C
yc

–
y
x

Figure 5/14

We can increase the accuracy of the approximation by decreasing
the widths of the strips. In all cases the average height of the strip
should be estimated in approximating the areas. Although it is usually
advantageous to use elements of constant width, it is not necessary. In
fact, we may use elements of any size and shape which approximate the
given area to satisfactory accuracy.

xϭ

y

Δx

ΣAyc

x

ΣVxc
ΣV

255

256

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces

SAMPLE PROBLEM 5/6

y

Locate the centroid of the shaded area.

12″
4″

The composite area is divided into the four elementary shapes
shown in the lower ﬁgure. The centroid locations of all these shapes may be obtained from Table D/3. Note that the areas of the “holes” (parts 3 and 4) are
taken as negative in the following table:

Solution.

A
in.2

x
in.

y
in.

1
2
3
4

120
30
Ϫ14.14
Ϫ8

6
14
6
12

5
10/3
1.273
4

TOTALS

127.9

PART

xA
in.3

3″

600
100
Ϫ18
Ϫ32

959

3″

yA
in.3

720
420
Ϫ84.8
Ϫ96

4″
2″

x

5″

2″ 2″

650

1

4

2

3

The area counterparts to Eqs. 5/7 are now applied and yield

΄X ϭ ΣAx΅
ΣA

Xϭ

959
ϭ 7.50 in.
127.9

Ans.

΄Y ϭ ΣA ΅

Yϭ

650
ϭ 5.08 in.
127.9

Ans.

ΣAy

SAMPLE PROBLEM 5/7

6

Approximate the x-coordinate of the volume centroid of a body whose length
is 1 m and whose cross-sectional area varies with x as shown in the ﬁgure.
A, m2

5
4
3
2

The body is divided into ﬁve sections. For each section, the average
area, volume, and centroid location are determined and entered in the following
table:

Solution.

1
0
0

0.2

0.6

0.4

0.8

x, m

INTERVAL

Aav
m2

Volume V
m3

x
m

Vx
m4

0–0.2
0.2–0.4
0.4–0.6
0.6–0.8
0.8–1.0

3
4.5
5.2
5.2
4.5

0.6
0.90
1.04
1.04
0.90

0.1
0.3
0.5
0.7
0.9

0.060
0.270
0.520
0.728
0.810

TOTALS

4.48

2.388
Helpful Hint

ᕡ

΄X ϭ ΣV x΅
ΣV

Xϭ

2.388
ϭ 0.533 m
4.48

Ans.

ᕡ Note that the shape of the body as a
function of y and z does not affect X.

1.0

Article 5/4

Composite Bodies and Figures; Approximations

SAMPLE PROBLEM 5/8

257

z

Locate the center of mass of the bracket-and-shaft combination. The vertical face is made from sheet metal which has a mass of 25 kg/m2. The material of
the horizontal base has a mass of 40 kg/m2, and the steel shaft has a density of
7.83 Mg/m3.

50
150
x
40

The composite body may be considered to be composed of the ﬁve elements shown in the lower portion of the illustration. The triangular part will be
taken as a negative mass. For the reference axes indicated it is clear by symmetry that the x-coordinate of the center of mass is zero.
The mass m of each part is easily calculated and should need no further explanation. For Part 1 we have from Sample Problem 5/3

Solution.

zϭ

4(50)
4r
ϭ
ϭ 21.2 mm
3␲
3␲

150

75

y

50

50

25
100

150

Dimensions in millimeters
1

For Part 3 we see from Sample Problem 5/2 that the centroid of the triangular
mass is one-third of its altitude above its base. Measurement from the coordinate
axes becomes

5

z ϭ Ϫ[150 Ϫ 25 Ϫ 1 (75)] ϭ Ϫ100 mm
3

3

The y- and z-coordinates to the mass centers of the remaining parts should be evident by inspection. The terms involved in applying Eqs. 5/7 are best handled in
the form of a table as follows:

PART
1
2
3
4
5
TOTALS

m
kg

y
mm

z
mm

my
kg ⅐ m

mz
kg ⅐ mm

0.098
0.562
Ϫ0.094
0.600
1.476

0
0
0
50.0
75.0

21.2
Ϫ75.0
Ϫ100.0
Ϫ150.0
0

0
0
0
30.0
110.7

2.08
Ϫ42.19
9.38
Ϫ90.00
0

140.7

Ϫ120.73

2.642

2

Equations 5/7 are now applied and the results are

΄Y ϭ Σmy΅
Σm

Yϭ

140.7
ϭ 53.3 mm
2.642

Ans.

΄Z ϭ Σmz΅
Σm

Zϭ

Ϫ120.73
ϭ Ϫ45.7 mm
2.642

Ans.

4

258

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces
5/49 Determine the coordinates of the centroid of the trapezoidal area shown.

PROBLEMS
Introductory Problems

y

5/47 Determine the x- and y-coordinates of the centroid
of the shaded area.

600
mm

y
600
mm

160

80

80

x

300
mm
Problem 5/49
120

5/50 Determine the y-coordinate of the centroid of the
shaded area.
x
y

Dimensions in millimeters
Problem 5/47

5/48 Determine the coordinates of the centroid of the
shaded area.
h
y
a
60°

60°

2″

x

Problem 5/50
3″

5/51 Determine the coordinates of the centroid of the
shaded area.
x

y

6″
200 mm

Problem 5/48

200 mm

150 mm

125 mm
60 mm
125 mm
x
Problem 5/51

Article 5/4
5/52 Calculate the y-coordinate of the centroid of the
shaded area.

Problems

259

5/55 Determine the x- and y-coordinates of the centroid of
the shaded area.

y

y

5′′
17″

60° 60°

4′′

3′′

13″

x
3″

15″

2′′

4′′

x

6′′
Problem 5/55

15″
Problem 5/52

Representative Problems
5/53 Determine the x-, y-, and z-coordinates of the mass
center of the body constructed of uniform slender rod.

5/56 Determine the y-coordinate of the centroid of the
shaded area.

z
75 mm
45°

45°
y
100 mm

90 mm

r

x
60 mm

O

60 mm
Problem 5/56

x
y
Problem 5/53

5/57 Determine the distance H from the bottom of the
base plate to the centroid of the built-up structural
section shown.

5/54 Calculate the x- and y-coordinates of the centroid
of the shaded area.

10

10

y
10

10

10

120
10

50

80

"
9

160
Dimensions in millimeters
x

Problem 5/54

Problem 5/57

10

260

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces

5/58 Determine the coordinates of the mass center of the
body which is constructed of three pieces of uniform
thin plate welded together.

5/61 Determine the coordinates of the center of mass of
the bracket, which is made from a plate of uniform
thickness.

z

y

b

2b
40 mm

80 mm

80 mm

b

z
x

100 mm
x

y

Problem 5/58
Problem 5/61

5/59 Determine the coordinates of the mass center of the
homogeneous body.
z

a
––
2

a
––
2

a
––
2

5/62 Determine the x-coordinate of the mass center of
the homogeneous hemisphere with the smaller
hemispherical portion removed.
y

a
––
2

a
––
2

R
x

a
––
2

R
–
–
2
z

y
x
Problem 5/59

5/60 Determine the height above the base of the centroid of
the cross-sectional area of the beam. Neglect the ﬁllets.
6.24″

1.40″
13.71″

0.87″

1.40″
12.48″
Problem 5/60

Problem 5/62

Article 5/4
5/63 Determine the coordinates of the mass center of
the body constructed of a uniform square plate, a
uniform straight rod, a uniform quarter-circular
rod, and a particle (negligible dimensions). The
mass of each component is given in the ﬁgure.

Problems

261

5/65 Determine the coordinates of the mass center of the
homogeneous body shown. The hole is centered in
the upper horizontal surface.
z

25

40

35

z
b

10
40

0.15m
30

0.5m

x

b

40
y

O
Dimensions in millimeters

0.1m
x

y
Problem 5/65

0.25m
Problem 5/63

5/64 Determine the position of the mass center of the
cylindrical shell with a closed semicircular end. The
shell is made from sheet metal with a mass of
24 kg/m2, and the end is made from metal plate
with a mass of 36 kg /m2.

5/66 Determine the coordinates of the centroid of the
body with ﬁve holes drilled completely through it.
Each of the four small holes has a radius of 6 mm.
z

10
600 mm
20

y
60

x

40

10

150 mm
Problem 5/64

x

y

6
70

10
60

50
10

Dimensions in millimeters
Problem 5/66

262

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces

5/67 The welded assembly is made of a uniform rod weighing 0.370 lb per foot of length and the semicircular
plate weighing 8 lb per square foot. Calculate the
coordinates of the center of gravity of the assembly.

5/70 Determine the z-coordinate of the centroid of the
rectangular solid with the hemispherical hole. The
center of the hemisphere is centered on the upper
face of the solid, and z is measured upward from the
lower face.

z
z

4″
4″

R
1.5R

y

6″

x

Problem 5/67
2.5R

5/68 The assembly shown is formed of uniform rod. For
what value of the length l will the mass center be
3r
located at a height of
above the supporting surface?
4

2.5R

Problem 5/70

5/71 Determine the z-coordinate of the centroid of the
rectangular solid with the spherical segment (less
than a hemisphere) removed. The center of the
hemisphere of which the segment is a portion is
located a distance R/4 above the center of the upper
face of the solid, and z is measured upward from the
lower face. Refer to the results of Prob. 5/34.

l

r

z
R
––
4

Problem 5/68

5/69 Determine the coordinates of the mass center of the
welded assembly of uniform slender rods made from
the same bar stock.

R

1.5R

z

2.5R
2.5R
a

a

Problem 5/71

y
a
a

x
Problem 5/69

Article 5/4
5/72 Determine the x-, y-, and z-coordinates of the mass
center of the sheet-metal shape shown.

Problems

263

5/74 Determine the coordinates of the mass center of the
bracket, which is constructed from sheet metal of
uniform thickness.

z
z

4″

4″

3″

a
x

y 3″

y
x

1″
a

2″

Problem 5/74

Problem 5/72

5/73 Calculate the x-, y-, and z-coordinates of the mass
center of the ﬁxture formed from aluminum plate of
uniform thickness.

5/75 Determine the y-coordinate of the centroid of the
shaded area. (Hint: Refer to the solution to
Prob. 5/41.)
y

z
70 mm
y
50 mm

20 mm
x
150 mm

Problem 5/75
240
mm
x

᭤5/76 An opening is formed in the thin cylindrical shell.
Determine the x-, y-, and z-coordinates of the mass
center of the homogeneous body.

80 mm
z

Problem 5/73

y

L
––
2

45°
3L
––
8

R
L
––
8

Problem 5/76

x

264

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces

5/5

A very simple method exists for calculating the surface area generated by revolving a plane curve about a nonintersecting axis in the plane
of the curve. In Fig. 5/16 the line segment of length L in the x-y plane
generates a surface when revolved about the x-axis. An element of this
surface is the ring generated by dL. The area of this ring is its circumference times its slant height or dA ϭ 2␲y dL. The total area is then

y
L
dL
C
y

Theorems of Pappus*

–
y

A ϭ 2␲
x

͵ y dL

Because yL ϭ ͐ y dL, the area becomes
A ϭ 2␲yL

(5/8)

Figure 5/16
where y is the y-coordinate of the centroid C for the line of length L.
Thus, the generated area is the same as the lateral area of a right-circular
cylinder of length L and radius y.
In the case of a volume generated by revolving an area about a nonintersecting line in its plane, an equally simple relation exists for ﬁnding the volume. An element of the volume generated by revolving the
area A about the x-axis, Fig. 5/17, is the elemental ring of cross section
dA and radius y. The volume of the element is its circumference times
dA or dV ϭ 2␲y dA, and the total volume is
V ϭ 2␲

͵ y dA

y

dA

C

y

A
–
y

x

Figure 5/17

*Attributed to Pappus of Alexandria, a Greek geometer who lived in the third century A.D.
The theorems often bear the name of Guldinus (Paul Guldin, 1577–1643), who claimed
original authorship, although the works of Pappus were apparently known to him.

Article 5/5

Because yA ϭ ͐ y dA, the volume becomes
V ϭ 2␲yA

(5/9)

where y is the y-coordinate of the centroid C of the revolved area A.
Thus, we obtain the generated volume by multiplying the generating
area by the circumference of the circular path described by its centroid.
The two theorems of Pappus, expressed by Eqs. 5/8 and 5/9, are useful for determining areas and volumes of revolution. They are also used
to ﬁnd the centroids of plane curves and plane areas when we know the
corresponding areas and volumes created by revolving these ﬁgures
about a nonintersecting axis. Dividing the area or volume by 2␲ times
the corresponding line segment length or plane area gives the distance
from the centroid to the axis.
If a line or an area is revolved through an angle ␪ less than 2␲, we
can determine the generated surface or volume by replacing 2␲ by ␪ in
Eqs. 5/8 and 5/9. Thus, the more general relations are
A ϭ ␪yL

(5/8a)

V ϭ ␪yA

(5/9a)

and

© Yann Guichaoua/SuperStock

where ␪ is expressed in radians.

Another view of the Millau Viaduct in southern France, which appears on
the cover. Note that the full height of the pylons is obscured here.

Theorems of Pappus

265

266

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces

SAMPLE PROBLEM 5/9

z
R

Determine the volume V and surface area A of the complete torus of circular
cross section.

a

Solution. The torus can be generated by revolving the circular area of radius a
through 360Њ about the z-axis. With the use of Eq. 5/9a, we have

ᕡ

V ϭ ␪rA ϭ 2␲(R)(␲a2) ϭ 2␲2Ra2

Ans.

Similarly, using Eq. 5/8a gives
z

A ϭ ␪rL ϭ 2␲(R)(2␲a) ϭ 4␲2Ra

–=R
r

Ans.

a

Helpful Hint

ᕡ We note that the angle ␪ of revolution is 2␲ for the complete ring. This
common but special-case result is
given by Eq. 5/9.

SAMPLE PROBLEM 5/10

z

Calculate the volume V of the solid generated by revolving the 60-mm righttriangular area through 180Њ about the z-axis. If this body were constructed of
steel, what would be its mass m?

60
mm
x

Solution.

ᕡ

With the angle of revolution ␪ ϭ 180Њ, Eq. 5/9a gives
V ϭ ␪rA ϭ ␲[30 ϩ 1(60)][1(60)(60)] ϭ 2.83(105) mm3
3
2

Ans.

The mass of the body is then

΄

m ϭ ␳V ϭ 7830
ϭ 2.21 kg

kg

΅

m3

[2.83(105)

mm3]

΄

z

΅

1m
1000 mm

30
mm

60
mm

3

Ans.
60
mm

C
–
r
30
mm

60
mm

Helpful Hint

ᕡ Note that ␪ must be in radians.

Article 5/5

Problems

267

5/79 Calculate the volume V of the solid generated by revolving the 60-mm right-triangular area about the
z-axis through 180Њ.

PROBLEMS
Introductory Problems
5/77 Using the methods of this article, determine the
surface area A and volume V of the body formed by
revolving the rectangular area through 360Њ about
the z-axis.

z

60
mm

12 mm

z

x

35 mm

8 mm

60
mm

30
mm

Problem 5/79

x

5/80 The circular arc is rotated through 360Њ about the
y-axis. Determine the outer surface area S of the
resulting body, which is a portion of a spherical shell.

y

Problem 5/77

y

5/78 Determine the volume V generated by revolving the
elliptical area through 180Њ about the z-axis.
z
45°

a
x

45°

35 mm
80
mm
Problem 5/78

50
mm

Problem 5/80

5/81 The quarter-circular area is rotated through 360Њ
about the y-axis. Determine the volume of the resulting body, which is a portion of a sphere.
y

45°

a
x

45°

Problem 5/81

268

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces

Representative Problems
5/82 The water storage tank is a shell of revolution and is
to be sprayed with two coats of paint which has a
coverage of 500 ft2 per gallon. The engineer (who remembers mechanics) consults a scale drawing of the
tank and determines that the curved line ABC has a
length of 34 ft and that its centroid is 8.2 ft from the
centerline of the tank. How many gallons of paint
will be used for the tank including the vertical cylindrical column?

5/84 The body shown in cross section is a complete circular ring formed by revolving the octagonal area
about the z-axis. The entire surface is to be covered
with a special coating. Determine this surface area.
z

20
40
20

A
40

20

60

20

Dimensions in millimeters
B

Problem 5/84

5/85 The lampshade shown is constructed of 0.6-mmthick steel and is symmetric about the z-axis. Both
the upper and lower ends are open. Determine the
mass of the lampshade. Take the radii to be to
midthickness.

C
18′
8′

z
Problem 5/82
30

5/83 Determine the mass of the quarter-circular length
of radiator hose. The inside diameter is 40 mm, the
wall thickness is 4 mm, and the density of the rubber material is 1050 kg /m3.

60

z

40 mm

x

80

y

250 mm

12
100

Problem 5/83

Dimensions in millimeters
Problem 5/85

Article 5/5
5/86 Calculate the volume V of the spacer in the form of
the complete ring of the semicircular section shown.
Also compute the total surface area A of the spacer.

Problems

269

5/89 Determine the mass of the titanium casting formed
by completely revolving the cross section shown
about the z-axis of symmetry.
z

z

10

10

10

20

3
–″
–
4

10
20
1″

–
1–
2

Dimensions in millimeters

Problem 5/86

Problem 5/89

5/87 Determine the inner surface area (generated by
revolving ABC completely about the z-axis) of the
body shown in cross section.
z

5/90 Determine the surface area of one side of the bellshaped shell of uniform but negligible thickness.
x

A
7′′

a

B
z
8′′
C

4′′

a

12′′

Problem 5/87

Problem 5/90

5/88 Determine the total surface area of the body generated by revolving the shaded area through 360Њ
about the x-axis.
y

5/91 A steel die, shown in section, has the form of a solid
generated by revolving the shaded area around the
z-axis. Calculate the mass m of the die.
z

r
60
mm
x
Problem 5/88

60 mm
160 mm
Problem 5/91

200
mm

270

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces

5/92 A hand-operated control wheel made of aluminum
has the proportions shown in the cross-sectional
view. The area of the total section shown is
15 200 mm2, and the wheel has a mass of 10 kg.
Calculate the distance r to the centroid of the halfsection. The aluminum has a density of 2.69 Mg /m3.

5/94 Determine the volume generated by rotating the
semicircular area through 180Њ.
z
30 mm

30°
C
75 mm
r
Problem 5/94

5/95 Determine the volume V and total surface area A
of the solid generated by revolving the area shown
through 180Њ about the z-axis.
z

Problem 5/92

5/93 The two circular arcs AB and BC are revolved about
the vertical axis to obtain the surface of revolution
shown. Compute the area A of the outside of this
surface.

40 mm
30 mm

2″

75 mm
A
2″

Problem 5/95
B
2″
C

5/96 Calculate the volume V of the large neoprene
washer in the form of the complete ring of section
shown. Also compute the overall surface area A.
z

Problem 5/93

0.5″

1″
Problem 5/96

2″

Article 5/5
5/97 The shaded area is bounded by one half-cycle of a
sine wave and the axis of the sine wave. Determine
the volume generated by completely revolving the
area about the x-axis.

Problems

271

5/99 In order to provide sufﬁcient support for the stone
masonry arch designed as shown, it is necessary to
know its total weight W. Use the results of Prob.
5/16 and determine W. The density of stone
masonry is 2.40 Mg /m 3.

y

r
b

2m
c

a

2m
x
1.5 m

8m

60°

Problem 5/97

5/98 A surface is generated by revolving the circular arc
of 0.8-m radius and subtended angle of 120Њ completely about the z-axis. The diameter of the neck is
0.6 m. Determine the outside area A generated.

Problem 5/99

5/100 Calculate the mass m of concrete required to construct the arched dam shown. Concrete has a density of 2.40 Mg /m3.

z
10 m
70 m
0.8 m

120°

10 m
Section A-A

A
60°

0.6 m

Problem 5/98

200 m

Problem 5/100

A

272

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces

SECTION B
5/6

SPECIAL TOPICS

Beams—External Effects

Beams are structural members which offer resistance to bending
due to applied loads. Most beams are long prismatic bars, and the loads
are usually applied normal to the axes of the bars.
Beams are undoubtedly the most important of all structural members, so it is important to understand the basic theory underlying
their design. To analyze the load-carrying capacities of a beam we
must first establish the equilibrium requirements of the beam as a
whole and any portion of it considered separately. Second, we must establish the relations between the resulting forces and the accompanying internal resistance of the beam to support these forces. The first
part of this analysis requires the application of the principles of statics. The second part involves the strength characteristics of the material and is usually treated in studies of the mechanics of solids or the
mechanics of materials.
This article is concerned with the external loading and reactions acting on a beam. In Art. 5/7 we calculate the distribution along the beam
of the internal force and moment.

Types of Beams
Beams supported so that their external support reactions can be calculated by the methods of statics alone are called statically determinate
beams. A beam which has more supports than needed to provide equilibrium is statically indeterminate. To determine the support reactions for
such a beam we must consider its load-deformation properties in addition to the equations of static equilibrium. Figure 5/18 shows examples

Simple
Continuous

Cantilever
End-supported cantilever

Fixed

Combination

⎫
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎭

⎫
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎭
Statically determinate beams

Statically indeterminate beams

Figure 5/18

Article 5/6

of both types of beams. In this article we will analyze statically determinate beams only.
Beams may also be identiﬁed by the type of external loading they
support. The beams in Fig. 5/18 are supporting concentrated loads,
whereas the beam in Fig. 5/19 is supporting a distributed load. The intensity w of a distributed load may be expressed as force per unit length
of beam. The intensity may be constant or variable, continuous or discontinuous. The intensity of the loading in Fig. 5/19 is constant from C
to D and variable from A to C and from D to B. The intensity is discontinuous at D, where it changes magnitude abruptly. Although the intensity itself is not discontinuous at C, the rate of change of intensity dw/dx
is discontinuous.

Beams—External Effects

w
x
C

D
B

A

Figure 5/19
L/ 2
R = wL
w

Distributed Loads
Loading intensities which are constant or which vary linearly are
easily handled. Figure 5/20 illustrates the three most common cases and
the resultants of the distributed loads in each case.
In cases a and b of Fig. 5/20, we see that the resultant load R is represented by the area formed by the intensity w (force per unit length of
beam) and the length L over which the force is distributed. The resultant passes through the centroid of this area.
In part c of Fig. 5/20, the trapezoidal area is broken into a rectangular and a triangular area, and the corresponding resultants R1 and R2 of
these subareas are determined separately. Note that a single resultant
could be determined by using the composite technique for ﬁnding centroids, which was discussed in Art. 5/4. Usually, however, the determination of a single resultant is unnecessary.
For a more general load distribution, Fig. 5/21, we must start with a
differential increment of force dR ϭ w dx. The total load R is then the
sum of the differential forces, or

L
(a)
R = 1 wL
–
2
2L/3
w

L
(b)
R2 = 1 (w2 – w1)L
–
2
2L/3
R1 = w1L
L/2

Rϭ

͵ w dx

As before, the resultant R is located at the centroid of the area under
consideration. The x-coordinate of this centroid is found by the principle
of moments Rx ϭ ͐ xw dx, or

xϭ

͵ xw dx
R

w2
w1

L
(c)

Figure 5/20
R

–
x
dR = w dx
w

For the distribution of Fig. 5/21, the vertical coordinate of the centroid
need not be found.
Once the distributed loads have been reduced to their equivalent
concentrated loads, the external reactions acting on the beam may be
found by a straightforward static analysis as developed in Chapter 3.

273

x

dx

Figure 5/21

274

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces

SAMPLE PROBLEM 5/11

4′

Determine the equivalent concentrated load(s) and external reactions for
the simply supported beam which is subjected to the distributed load shown.

The area associated with the load distribution is divided into the
rectangular and triangular areas shown. The concentrated-load values are determined by computing the areas, and these loads are located at the centroids of the
ᕡ respective areas.
Once the concentrated loads are determined, they are placed on the freebody diagram of the beam along with the external reactions at A and B. Using
principles of equilibrium, we have

Solution.

[ΣMA ϭ 0]

280 lb/ft

120 lb/ft

A

B

Helpful Hint

ᕡ Note that it is usually unnecessary
to reduce a given distributed load to
a single concentrated load.

5′

1200(5) ϩ 480(8) Ϫ RB(10) ϭ 0
RB ϭ 984 lb

[ΣMB ϭ 0]

6′

Ans.

1
– (160) (6) = 480 lb
2
160 lb/ft

8′

120 lb/ft
A

120 lb/ft
B
(120) (10) = 1200 lb

RA(10) Ϫ 1200(5) Ϫ 480(2) ϭ 0
RA ϭ 696 lb

1200 lb

Ans.

5′

480 lb
3′
B

A

RB

RA

SAMPLE PROBLEM 5/12

w(x)

Determine the reaction at the support A of the loaded cantilever beam.

8m

The constants in the load distribution are found to be w0 ϭ 1000
ᕡ N/m and k ϭ 2 N/m4. The load R is then

͵ w dx ϭ ͵

8

0

΂

(1000 ϩ 2x3) dx ϭ 1000x ϩ

x4
2

΃ͯ

8
0

ϭ

͵ xw dx ϭ
R

1
10 050

͵

ᕡ Use caution with the units of the
constants w0 and k.

ᕢ The student should recognize that

8

0

A

Helpful Hints

ϭ 10 050 N

ᕢ The x-coordinate of the centroid of the area is found by
xϭ

x(1000 ϩ 2x3) dx

the calculation of R and its location x
is simply an application of centroids
as treated in Art. 5/3.

8
1
2
(500x2 ϩ 5x5)͉ ϭ 4.49 m
0
10 050

10 050 N

From the free-body diagram of the beam, we have
[ΣMA ϭ 0]

4.49 m
Ax

MA Ϫ (10 050)(4.49) ϭ 0

Note that Ax ϭ 0 by inspection.

A

MA

MA ϭ 45 100 N ⅐ m
[ΣFy ϭ 0]

2024
N/m
x
B

1000 N/m

Solution.

Rϭ

w = w0 + kx3

Ans.

Ay ϭ 10 050 N

Ans.

Ay

B

y
x

Article 5/6

Problems

275

5/105 Determine the reactions at A and B for the beam
subjected to a combination of distributed and point
loads.

PROBLEMS
Introductory Problems
5/101 Determine the reactions at A and B for the beam
subjected to the uniform load distribution.

2 kN/m
1.5 kN

y

30°

y

x

4 kN/m
x
B

A
A

B
1.2 m
300 mm

0.6
m

500 mm

1.2 m

1.8 m

1.2 m

Problem 5/101

Problem 5/105

5/102 Calculate the support reactions at A and B for the
loaded beam.

5/106 Determine the reactions at the supports of the
beam which is loaded as shown.

100 lb/ft
800 N/m
A

B

400 N/m

A
B

3′

1
m

6m

6′

1
m

80 lb
Problem 5/106
Problem 5/102

5/103 Find the reaction at A due to the uniform loading
and the applied couple.

5/107 Determine the reactions at the supports A and B
for the beam loaded as shown.
w0

2 kN/m
12 kN.m
A

A

B
l
––
2

3m

3m

Problem 5/107

Problem 5/103

5/104 Calculate the supporting force RA and moment MA
acting on the loaded cantilever beam at A.

120 lb/ft
A

6′

6′
Problem 5/104

l
––
2

276

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces

5/108 Calculate the support reactions at A and B for the
loaded beam.

5/111 Calculate the support reactions at A and B for the
beam subjected to the two linearly varying load
distributions.

y
6 kN/m

x

w0

2 kN/m

4 kN/m

w0

A
A

B

B
l
––
3

2l
––
–
3

4m

6m
Problem 5/111

Problem 5/108

5/112 The beam is subjected to an elliptical load distribution and the point loads shown. For what value of
the force P will the reaction at B go to zero?

Representative Problems
5/109 The beam is subjected to the distributed load and
the couple shown. If M is slowly increased starting
from zero, at what value M0 will contact at B change
from the lower surface to the upper surface?

4 kN/m
20 kN·m

B

A

y

P
400 lb/ft

x

2m

3m

1m

2m

2m

M
Problem 5/112
A

B
3′

3′

3′

3′

5/113 Determine the force and moment reactions at the
support A of the built-in beam which is subjected
to the sine-wave load distribution.

Problem 5/109
w0
Sine wave

5/110 Determine the force and moment reactions at A for
the beam which is subjected to the load combination shown.
2′

3′

3′

2′

12 kips

A

A
5 kip/ft

30 kip-ft

l

2 kip/ft
Problem 5/110

Problem 5/113

Article 5/6
5/114 The cantilever beam is subjected to a parabolic distribution of load symmetrical about the middle of
the beam. Determine the supporting force RA and
moment MA acting on the beam at A.

Problems

277

5/117 Determine the reactions at points A and B of the
inclined beam subjected to the vertical load distribution shown. The value of the load distribution at
the right end of the beam is 5 kN per horizontal
meter.

w
w0
A

5 kN/m

x
A
l/2

4m

l/2

30°
B

Problem 5/114

5/115 Calculate the support reactions at A and B for the
beam subjected to the two linearly distributed loads.
0.8 m
6 kN/m

3 kN/m

A

3 kN/m

6 kN/m

Problem 5/117

5/118 The load per foot of beam length varies as shown.
For x ϭ 10 ft, the unit load is w ϭ 300 lb /ft. At
x ϭ 0, the load is increasing at the rate of 50 lb /ft
per foot. Calculate the support reactions at A and B.

B
w = k1x – k2 x2
w

4m

2.4 m

w

1.6 m

Problem 5/115

A

B

5/116 A cantilever beam supports the variable load
shown. Calculate the supporting force RA and
moment MA at A.

x

10′
Problem 5/118

w

5/119 Determine the reactions at the support for the
beam which is subjected to the combination of uniform and parabolic loading distributions.

w = w0 + kx 2
900 N/m
500 N/m

x

8 kN/m

A

Parabolic
region

6m
Problem 5/116

A

B
3m
Problem 5/119

2m

278

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces

5/120 A beam is subjected to the variable loading shown.
Calculate the support reactions at A and B.

5/123 Determine the reactions at the supports of the
beam which is acted on by the combination of uniform and parabolic loading distributions.

w
Parabolic
region

w
w = w0 – kx 3

100 lb/ft
x
B

A
20′

x
B

A
1m

Problem 5/120

6 kN/m

Vertex

2 kN/m

200 lb/ft

1m

3m
Problem 5/123

5/121 Determine the force and moment reactions at the
support A of the cantilever beam subjected to the
load distribution shown.
w=k x
w

᭤ 5/124 The quarter-circular cantilever beam is subjected
to a uniform pressure on its upper surface as
shown. The pressure is expressed in terms of the
force p per unit length of circumferential arc.
Determine the reactions on the beam at its support A in terms of the compression CA, shear VA,
and bending moment MA.

w0
x

p

A
A
l

θ

Problem 5/121

5/122 Determine the reactions at A and B for the beam
subjected to the distributed and concentrated loads.
w

w = w0 + kx 2
4 kN
w

2 kN/m

6 kN / m
0.5 m
x

A
0.6 m

B
1.4 m

0.4 m 0.6 m

Problem 5/122

r

Problem 5/124

Article 5/7

5/7

Beams—Internal Effects

Beams—Internal Effects

V

The previous article treated the reduction of a distributed force to
one or more equivalent concentrated forces and the subsequent determination of the external reactions acting on the beam. In this article we introduce internal beam effects and apply principles of statics to calculate
the internal shear force and bending moment as functions of location
along the beam.

Shear, Bending, and Torsion
In addition to supporting tension or compression, a beam can resist
shear, bending, and torsion. These three effects are illustrated in Fig.
5/22. The force V is called the shear force, the couple M is called the
bending moment, and the couple T is called a torsional moment. These
effects represent the vector components of the resultant of the forces
acting on a transverse section of the beam as shown in the lower part of
the ﬁgure.
Consider the shear force V and bending moment M caused by forces
applied to the beam in a single plane. The conventions for positive values of shear V and bending moment M shown in Fig. 5/23 are the ones
generally used. From the principle of action and reaction we can see
that the directions of V and M are reversed on the two sections. It is frequently impossible to tell without calculation whether the shear and
moment at a particular section are positive or negative. For this reason
it is advisable to represent V and M in their positive directions on the
free-body diagrams and let the algebraic signs of the calculated values
indicate the proper directions.
As an aid to the physical interpretation of the bending couple M,
consider the beam shown in Fig. 5/24 bent by the two equal and opposite
positive moments applied at the ends. The cross section of the beam is
treated as an H-section with a very narrow center web and heavy top
and bottom ﬂanges. For this beam we may neglect the load carried by
the small web compared with that carried by the two ﬂanges. The upper
ﬂange of the beam clearly is shortened and is under compression,
whereas the lower ﬂange is lengthened and is under tension. The resultant of the two forces, one tensile and the other compressive, acting on
any section is a couple and has the value of the bending moment on the
section. If a beam having some other cross-sectional shape were loaded

+M

+M

Figure 5/24

279

V
Shear

M
Bending

M

Torsion

T

T

T

M
V
Combined loading

Figure 5/22

+V
+M

+M

+V

Figure 5/23

280

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces

in the same way, the distribution of force over the cross section would
be different, but the resultant would be the same couple.

Shear-Force and Bending-Moment Diagrams
The variation of shear force V and bending moment M over the
length of a beam provides information necessary for the design analysis
of the beam. In particular, the maximum magnitude of the bending moment is usually the primary consideration in the design or selection of a
beam, and its value and position should be determined. The variations
in shear and moment are best shown graphically, and the expressions
for V and M when plotted against distance along the beam give the
shear-force and bending-moment diagrams for the beam.
The ﬁrst step in the determination of the shear and moment relations is to establish the values of all external reactions on the beam by
applying the equations of equilibrium to a free-body diagram of the
beam as a whole. Next, we isolate a portion of the beam, either to the
right or to the left of an arbitrary transverse section, with a free-body
diagram, and apply the equations of equilibrium to this isolated portion
of the beam. These equations will yield expressions for the shear force V
and bending moment M acting at the cut section on the part of the beam
isolated. The part of the beam which involves the smaller number of
forces, either to the right or to the left of the arbitrary section, usually
yields the simpler solution.
We should avoid using a transverse section which coincides with the
location of a concentrated load or couple, as such a position represents a
point of discontinuity in the variation of shear or bending moment. Finally, it is important to note that the calculations for V and M on each
section chosen should be consistent with the positive convention illustrated in Fig. 5/23.
General Loading, Shear, and Moment Relationships
For any beam with distributed loads we can establish certain general relationships which will aid greatly in the determination of the
shear and moment distributions along the beam. Figure 5/25 represents
a portion of a loaded beam, where an element dx of the beam is isolated.
The loading w represents the force per unit length of beam. At the location x the shear V and moment M acting on the element are drawn in
their positive directions. On the opposite side of the element where the
dx

w = ƒ(x)
V

w

w
M + dM

x

dx

M
V + dV

Figure 5/25

Article 5/7

Beams—Internal Effects

281

coordinate is x ϩ dx, these quantities are also shown in their positive directions. They must, however, be labeled V ϩ dV and M ϩ dM, since V
and M change with x. The applied loading w may be considered constant
over the length of the element, since this length is a differential quantity and the effect of any change in w disappears in the limit compared
with the effect of w itself.
Equilibrium of the element requires that the sum of the vertical
forces be zero. Thus, we have
V Ϫ w dx Ϫ (V ϩ dV) ϭ 0
or
wϭϪ

dV
dx

(5/10)

͵

͵

V

V0

dV ϭ Ϫ

© Jake Wyman/Photonica/Getty Images

We see from Eq. 5/10 that the slope of the shear diagram must everywhere be equal to the negative of the value of the applied loading. Equation 5/10 holds on either side of a concentrated load but not at the
concentrated load because of the discontinuity produced by the abrupt
change in shear.
We may now express the shear force V in terms of the loading w by
integrating Eq. 5/10. Thus,
x

w dx

x0

or
V ϭ V0 ϩ (the negative of the area under
the loading curve from x0 to x)
In this expression V0 is the shear force at x0 and V is the shear force at x.
Summing the area under the loading curve is usually a simple way to
construct the shear-force diagram.
Equilibrium of the element in Fig. 5/25 also requires that the moment sum be zero. Summing moments about the left side of the element
gives
M ϩ w dx

dx
ϩ (V ϩ dV) dx Ϫ (M ϩ dM) ϭ 0
2

The two M’s cancel, and the terms w(dx)2/2 and dV dx may be dropped,
since they are differentials of higher order than those which remain.
This leaves
Vϭ

dM
dx

(5/11)

Because of its economical use of
material in achieving bending stiffness, the I-beam is a very common
structural element.

282

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces

which expresses the fact that the shear everywhere is equal to the slope
of the moment curve. Equation 5/11 holds on either side of a concentrated couple but not at the concentrated couple because of the discontinuity caused by the abrupt change in moment.
We may now express the moment M in terms of the shear V by integrating Eq. 5/11. Thus,

͵

M

M0

dM ϭ

͵

x

V dx

x0

or
M ϭ M0 ϩ (area under the shear diagram from x0 to x)
In this expression M0 is the bending moment at x0 and M is the bending moment at x. For beams where there is no externally applied moment M0 at x0 ϭ 0, the total moment at any section equals the area
under the shear diagram up to that section. Summing the area under
the shear diagram is usually the simplest way to construct the moment diagram.
When V passes through zero and is a continuous function of x with
dV/dx
0, the bending moment M will be a maximum or a minimum,
since dM/dx ϭ 0 at such a point. Critical values of M also occur when V
crosses the zero axis discontinuously, which occurs for beams under
concentrated loads.
We observe from Eqs. 5/10 and 5/11 that the degree of V in x is one
higher than that of w. Also M is of one higher degree in x than is V. Consequently, M is two degrees higher in x than w. Thus for a beam loaded
by w ϭ kx, which is of the ﬁrst degree in x, the shear V is of the second
degree in x and the bending moment M is of the third degree in x.
Equations 5/10 and 5/11 may be combined to yield
d2M
ϭ Ϫw
dx2

(5/12)

Thus, if w is a known function of x, the moment M can be obtained by
two integrations, provided that the limits of integration are properly
evaluated each time. This method is usable only if w is a continuous
function of x.*
When bending in a beam occurs in more than a single plane, we
may perform a separate analysis in each plane and combine the results
vectorially.

*When w is a discontinuous function of x, it is possible to introduce a special set of expressions called singularity functions which permit writing analytical expressions for shear V and
moment M over an interval which includes discontinuities. These functions are not discussed
in this book.

Article 5/7

Beams—Internal Effects

SAMPLE PROBLEM 5/13

283

4 kN

Determine the shear and moment distributions produced in the simple
beam by the 4-kN concentrated load.

6m

From the free-body diagram of the entire beam we ﬁnd the support
reactions, which are

4m

Solution.

R1 ϭ 1.6 kN

4 kN

y

R2 ϭ 2.4 kN
x

A section of the beam of length x is next isolated with its free-body diagram
on which we show the shear V and the bending moment M in their positive directions. Equilibrium gives
R1 = 1.6 kN

[ΣFy ϭ 0]
[ΣMR1 ϭ 0]

1.6 Ϫ V ϭ 0
M Ϫ 1.6x ϭ 0

R2 = 2.4 kN

V ϭ 1.6 kN
V

y

M ϭ 1.6x

load.
A section of the beam to the right of the 4-kN load is next isolated with its
free-body diagram on which V and M are shown in their positive directions.
Equilibrium requires
[ΣFy ϭ 0]
[ΣMR2 ϭ 0]

V ϩ 2.4 ϭ 0
Ϫ(2.4)(10 Ϫ x) ϩ M ϭ 0

V ϭ Ϫ2.4 kN
M ϭ 2.4(10 Ϫ x)

These results apply only to sections of the beam to the right of the 4-kN load.
The values of V and M are plotted as shown. The maximum bending moment occurs where the shear changes direction. As we move in the positive
x-direction starting with x ϭ 0, we see that the moment M is merely the
accumulated area under the shear diagram.

M

M

ᕡ These values of V and M apply to all sections of the beam to the left of the 4-kN

10 – x

x
1.6 kN

V

2.4 kN

V, kN
1.6
0
0

6

10

x, m

–2.4

M, kN·m
9.6

0
0

6

10

Helpful Hint

ᕡ We must be careful not to take our
section at a concentrated load (such
as x ϭ 6 m) since the shear and moment relations involve discontinuities at such positions.

x, m

284

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces

SAMPLE PROBLEM 5/14
The cantilever beam is subjected to the load intensity (force per unit length)
which varies as w ϭ w0 sin (␲x/l). Determine the shear force V and bending moment M as functions of the ratio x/l.

w0

w

x
l

The free-body diagram of the entire beam is drawn ﬁrst so that the
shear force V0 and bending moment M0 which act at the supported end at x ϭ 0
can be computed. By convention V0 and M0 are shown in their positive mathematical senses. A summation of vertical forces for equilibrium gives

Solution.

͵ w dx ϭ 0
l

[ΣFy ϭ 0]

V0 Ϫ

V0 ϭ

0

͵

l

0

w

M0

2w0l
␲x
dx ϭ ␲
w0 sin
l

x

ᕡ A summation of moments about the left end at x ϭ 0 for equilibrium gives

͵ x(w dx) ϭ 0

M0 ϭ

␲2

΄

΅

0

0

l

␲x
␲x ␲x
Ϫ
cos
sin
l
l
l

0

M0

w0l2
ϭϪ ␲

͵

ᕢ [dV ϭ Ϫw dx]

͵

V0

dV ϭ Ϫ

΄

0

x

΅

w0l
␲x
V Ϫ V0 ϭ ␲ cos
l

x

w0 sin

V0

΂

΃

V
——
w0 l
0

or in dimensionless form

0

΂

1
␲x
V
ϭ
1 ϩ cos
w0l ␲
l

΃

Ans.

The bending moment is obtained by integration of Eq. 5/11, which gives
[dM ϭ V dx]

͵

M

M0

V

0.637

␲x
dx
l

2w0l w0l
␲x
Ϫ1
V Ϫ ␲ ϭ ␲ cos
l

0

M

x

From a free-body diagram of an arbitrary section of length x, integration of
Eq. 5/10 permits us to ﬁnd the shear force internal to the beam. Thus,
V

dx

V0

l

M0 ϭ Ϫ

0

Ϫw0l2

x

͵ w x sin ␲x dx
l

l

ϪM0 Ϫ

[ΣM ϭ 0]

R

y

dM ϭ

͵

x

0

΂

΃

w0l
␲x
␲ 1 ϩ cos l dx

΄

0

΄

΅

w0l2 w0l
l
␲x
Ϫ0
M ϭ Ϫ ␲ ϩ ␲ x ϩ ␲ sin
l
or in dimensionless form

΂

2

0.6

0.8

1.0

–0.318

ᕡ In this case of symmetry it is clear

x

M
1
1 x
␲x
Ϫ 1 ϩ ␲ sin
ϭ
w0l2 ␲ l
l

x/l

Helpful Hints

΅

w0l
l
␲x
M Ϫ M0 ϭ ␲ x ϩ ␲ sin
l

0.2

0
M
——–
2
w0 l

΃

Ans.

The variations of V/w0l and M/w0l with x/l are shown in the bottom ﬁgures.
The negative values of M/w0l2 indicate that physically the bending moment is in
the direction opposite to that shown.

that the resultant R ϭ V0 ϭ 2w0l/␲ of
the load distribution acts at midspan,
so that the moment requirement is
simply M0 ϭ ϪRl/2 ϭ Ϫw0l2/␲. The
minus sign tells us that physically
the bending moment at x ϭ 0 is opposite to that represented on the freebody diagram.

ᕢ The free-body diagram serves to
remind us that the integration
limits for V as well as for x must be
accounted for. We see that the
expression for V is positive, so that
the shear force is as represented on
the free-body diagram.

Article 5/7

Beams—Internal Effects

SAMPLE PROBLEM 5/15

285

100 lb/ft

300 lb

Draw the shear-force and bending-moment diagrams for the loaded beam
and determine the maximum moment M and its location x from the left end.

4′

The support reactions are most easily obtained by considering the
resultants of the distributed loads as shown on the free-body diagram of the
beam as a whole. The ﬁrst interval of the beam is analyzed from the free-body diagram of the section for 0 Ͻ x Ͻ 4 ft. A summation of vertical forces and a moment summation about the cut section yield

Solution.

y

4′

200 lb
8′
––
3

2′

400 lb
300 lb

V ϭ 247 Ϫ 12.5x2

[ΣFy ϭ 0]
M ϩ (12.5x2)

[ΣM ϭ 0]

x
Ϫ 247x ϭ 0
3

x

M ϭ 247x Ϫ 4.17x3
R1 = 247 lb

These values of V and M hold for 0 Ͻ x Ͻ 4 ft and are plotted for that interval in
the shear and moment diagrams shown.
From the free-body diagram of the section for which 4 Ͻ x Ͻ 8 ft, equilibrium in the vertical direction and a moment sum about the cut section give

R2 = 653 lb

12.5x2
2x
––
3

[ΣFy ϭ 0]

V ϩ 100(x Ϫ 4) ϩ 200 Ϫ 247 ϭ 0

V ϭ 447 Ϫ 100x

[ΣM ϭ 0]

xϪ4
2
M ϩ 100(x Ϫ 4)
ϩ 200[x Ϫ 3(4)] Ϫ 247x ϭ 0
2

12 – x

x

M
V

247 lb

M ϭ Ϫ267 ϩ 447x Ϫ 50x2

100(x – 4)
x–4
––––
2
M
x
V

247 lb

and

M ϭ 2930 Ϫ 353x

V, lb

These values of V and M are plotted on the shear and moment diagrams for the
interval 8 Ͻ x Ͻ 10 ft.
The last interval may be analyzed by inspection. The shear is constant at
ϩ300 lb, and the moment follows a straight-line relation beginning with zero at
the right end of the beam.
The maximum moment occurs at x ϭ 4.47 ft, where the shear curve crosses
the zero axis, and the magnitude of M is obtained for this value of x by substitution into the expression for M for the second interval. The maximum moment is
M ϭ 732 lb-ft

and, as above,

MϪ0ϭ

͵

300

247
0
0

4

8

10

4.47′
–353

M, lb-ft
732

0
0

4

8

10

x

0

(247 Ϫ 12.5x2) dx

M ϭ 247x Ϫ 4.17x3

x, ft

12

Ans.

As before, note that the change in moment M up to any section equals the
area under the shear diagram up to that section. For instance, for x Ͻ 4 ft,

͵ V dx]

653 lb

200 lb

These values of V and M are plotted on the shear and moment diagrams for the
interval 4 Ͻ x Ͻ 8 ft.
The analysis of the remainder of the beam is continued from the free-body
diagram of the portion of the beam to the right of a section in the next interval.
It should be noted that V and M are represented in their positive directions. A
vertical-force summation and a moment summation about the section yield
V ϭ Ϫ353 lb

300 lb

V

x
– 100
4
M

[⌬M ϭ

2′

–600

12

x, ft

286

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces
5/128 Draw the shear and moment diagrams for the
loaded beam and determine the distance d to the
right of A where the moment is zero.

PROBLEMS
Introductory Problems
5/125 Determine the shear-force and bending-moment
distributions produced in the beam by the concentrated load. What are the values of the shear and
moment when x ϭ l/2?

2 kN
2m

2m

2m

A

P
2l
––
–
3

4 kN

l
––
3

B

x

Problem 5/128

A

B

5/129 Draw the shear and moment diagrams for the
beam loaded at its center by the couple C. State
the value of the shear force at midbeam.

Problem 5/125

5/126 Draw the shear and moment diagrams for the loaded
cantilever beam. State the value of the bending moment at midbeam.
P
l
––
2

A

B
C
l/2

P
l
––
2

l/2

Problem 5/129

5/130 Draw the shear and moment diagrams for the
loaded beam. What are the values of the shear and
moment at midbeam?

A
Problem 5/126

5/127 Draw the shear and moment diagrams for the diving board, which supports the 175-lb man poised to
dive. Specify the bending moment with the maximum magnitude.

l
––
3

l
––
3

l
––
3

B

A
M0
Problem 5/130

5/131 Draw the shear and moment diagrams for the
beam shown and ﬁnd the bending moment M at
section C.

B

A

800 lb

12′′

1000 lb

42′′
12′
A

Problem 5/127
3′

C
3′

B
600 lb
3′
3′

Problem 5/131

Article 5/7
5/132 Draw the shear and moment diagrams for the beam
subjected to the two point loads. Determine the
maximum bending moment Mmax and its location.
x
l
––
2

287

5/135 Draw the shear and moment diagrams for the uniformly loaded beam and ﬁnd the maximum bending moment Mmax.
w

2P

l
––
4

Problems

l
––
4

A

B
l
P
Problem 5/135
Problem 5/132

5/136 Draw the shear and moment diagrams for the
loaded beam and determine the maximum value
Mmax of the moment.

Representative Problems
5/133 Draw the shear and moment diagrams for the
loaded beam and ﬁnd the maximum magnitude M
of the bending moment.
P/l N/m

P

300 lb/ft

A

B
4′

4′

4′

Problem 5/136
l

l

l

Problem 5/133

5/134 Construct the shear and moment diagrams for the
beam loaded by the 2-kN force and the 1.6-kN ⅐ m
couple. State the value of the bending moment at
point B.

5/137 Draw the shear and moment diagrams for the
loaded cantilever beam where the end couple M1 is
adjusted so as to produce zero moment at the ﬁxed
end of the beam. Find the bending moment M at
x ϭ 4 ft.
200 lb/ft

2 kN

M1

1.6 kN·m
B

x

A

8′
0.5 m

0.5 m
Problem 5/134

0.5 m

8′

Problem 5/137

288

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces

5/138 Determine the shear and moment diagrams for the
loaded cantilever beam. Specify the shear V and
moment M at the middle section of the beam.

5/142 Draw the shear and moment diagrams for the beam
loaded as shown. Specify the maximum moment
Mmax.

600 N/m
w0
A

w0

A

4m

B

8m
L
––
2

Problem 5/138

5/139 The shear force in pounds in a certain beam is
given by V ϭ 2200x – 40x3 where x is the distance
in feet measured along the beam. Determine the
corresponding variation with x of the normal loading w in pounds per foot of length. Also determine
the bending moment M at x ϭ 3 ft if the bending
moment at x ϭ 1 ft is Ϫ1600 lb-ft.

L
––
2
Problem 5/142

5/143 Determine the maximum bending moment M and
the corresponding value of x in the crane beam and
indicate the section where this moment acts.
l
x

a a

5/140 Draw the shear and moment diagrams for the linearly loaded cantilever beam and specify the bending moment MA at the support A.

A

B

w0
L
Problem 5/143

A
l
Problem 5/140

5/144 Draw the shear and moment diagrams for the
beam loaded by the force F applied to the strut
welded to the beam as shown. Specify the bending
moment at point B.

5/141 Draw the shear and moment diagrams for the linearly loaded simple beam shown. Determine the
maximum magnitude of the bending moment M.

F
h

w0

B
A

b
l/2

b

l/2
Problem 5/144

Problem 5/141

Article 5/7
5/145 The angle strut is welded to the end C of the
I-beam and supports the 1.6-kN vertical force.
Determine the bending moment at B and the distance x to the left of C at which the bending moment is zero. Also construct the moment diagram
for the beam.
1.6 kN

Problems

289

5/148 Repeat Prob. 5/147, where the 1500-N load has
been replaced by the 4.2-kN ⅐ m couple.
x

800 N/m

4.2 kN·m

A

200
mm

B

2m

3m

2m

2m

Problem 5/148

5/149 The adjusting screw of the special-purpose offset
clamp supports a compression of 500 N. Calculate
the shear force V, the tension T, and the bending
moment M at section A of the clamp bar for x ϭ
250 mm. Which of these three quantities changes
with x?

B
A
C
400 mm

450 mm

x

A

Problem 5/145

5/146 The I-beam supports the 1000-lb force and the
2000-lb-ft couple applied to the 2-ft strut welded to
the end of the beam. Calculate the shear V and moment M at the section midway between A and B.
1000 lb

160 mm
50 mm

400 mm

2000 lb-ft

Problem 5/149

4

A

3

3′

2′

B

5/150 Draw the shear and moment diagrams for the
loaded beam and specify the shear V and moment
M at a section 3 m to the left of the support at A.

3′

3′

Problem 5/146

5/147 Plot the shear and moment diagrams for the beam
loaded with both the distributed and point loads.
What are the values of the shear and moment
at x ϭ 6 m? Determine the maximum bending
moment Mmax.

800 N/m

A

B

2m

3m

2m

Problem 5/147

2m

6m
Problem 5/150

1500 N
x

B

4 kN/m

A

3m

290

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces

5/151 Derive expressions for the shear force V and bending moment M as functions of x in the cantilever
beam loaded as shown.
w

5/153 Derive expressions for the shear V and moment M
in terms of x for the cantilever beam of Prob. 5/114
shown again here. The loading is parabolic.
w

w = w0 + kx 2
100 lb/ft

400 lb/ft

w0

w
x

A
10′

x

Problem 5/151

5/152 Draw the shear and moment diagrams for the
beam of Prob. 5/116 repeated here and specify
the shear V and moment M at the midlength of
the beam.
w
w = w0 +

kx 2

900 N/m
500 N/m

x

A
l/2

l/2
Problem 5/153

᭤5/154 The beam supports a uniform unit load w. Determine the location x of the two supports so as to
minimize the maximum bending moment Mmax in
the beam. Specify Mmax.

A
w
6m
Problem 5/152

x

x
L
Problem 5/154

Article 5/8

5/8

Flexible Cables

One important type of structural member is the ﬂexible cable which
is used in suspension bridges, transmission lines, messenger cables for
supporting heavy trolley or telephone lines, and many other applications. To design these structures we must know the relations involving
the tension, span, sag, and length of the cables. We determine these
quantities by examining the cable as a body in equilibrium. In the analysis of ﬂexible cables we assume that any resistance offered to bending is
negligible. This assumption means that the force in the cable is always
in the direction of the cable.
Flexible cables may support a series of distinct concentrated loads,
as shown in Fig. 5/26a, or they may support loads continuously distributed over the length of the cable, as indicated by the variable-intensity
loading w in 5/26b. In some instances the weight of the cable is negligible compared with the loads it supports. In other cases the weight of
the cable may be an appreciable load or the sole load and cannot be
neglected. Regardless of which of these conditions is present, the equilibrium requirements of the cable may be formulated in the same
manner.

General Relationships
If the intensity of the variable and continuous load applied to the
cable of Fig. 5/26b is expressed as w units of force per unit of horizontal
length x, then the resultant R of the vertical loading is
Rϭ

͵ dR ϭ ͵ w dx

y
F1

F2

F3

x + dx

(a)

T + dT

x

x
x
–
x

T

θ + dθ

θ

w dx

w

(c)
R
(b)

Figure 5/26

Flexible Cables

291

292

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces

where the integration is taken over the desired interval. We ﬁnd the position of R from the moment principle, so that

Rx ϭ

͵ x dR

xϭ

͵ x dR
R

The elemental load dR ϭ w dx is represented by an elemental strip of
vertical length w and width dx of the shaded area of the loading diagram, and R is represented by the total area. It follows from the foregoing expressions that R passes through the centroid of the shaded area.
The equilibrium condition of the cable is satisﬁed if each inﬁnitesimal element of the cable is in equilibrium. The free-body diagram of a
differential element is shown in Fig. 5/26c. At the general position x the
tension in the cable is T, and the cable makes an angle ␪ with the horizontal x-direction. At the section x ϩ dx the tension is T ϩ dT, and the
angle is ␪ ϩ d␪. Note that the changes in both T and ␪ are taken to be
positive with a positive change in x. The vertical load w dx completes the
free-body diagram. The equilibrium of vertical and horizontal forces requires, respectively, that
(T ϩ dT) sin (␪ ϩ d␪) ϭ T sin ␪ ϩ w dx
(T ϩ dT) cos (␪ ϩ d␪) ϭ T cos ␪
The trigonometric expansion for the sine and cosine of the sum of two
angles and the substitutions sin d␪ ϭ d␪ and cos d␪ ϭ 1, which hold in
the limit as d␪ approaches zero, yield
(T ϩ dT)(sin ␪ ϩ cos ␪ d␪) ϭ T sin ␪ ϩ w dx
(T ϩ dT)(cos ␪ Ϫ sin ␪ d␪) ϭ T cos ␪
Dropping the second-order terms and simplifying give us
T cos ␪ d␪ ϩ dT sin ␪ ϭ w dx
ϪT sin ␪ d␪ ϩ dT cos ␪ ϭ 0
which we write as
d(T sin ␪) ϭ w dx

and

d(T cos ␪) ϭ 0

The second relation expresses the fact that the horizontal component of
T remains unchanged, which is clear from the free-body diagram. If we
introduce the symbol T0 ϭ T cos ␪ for this constant horizontal force, we
may then substitute T ϭ T0/cos ␪ into the ﬁrst of the two equations just
derived and obtain d(T0 tan ␪) ϭ w dx. Because tan ␪ ϭ dy/dx, the equilibrium equation may be written in the form
d2y
dx2

ϭ

w
T0

(5/13)

Article 5/8

Equation 5/13 is the differential equation for the ﬂexible cable. The
solution to the equation is that functional relation y ϭ ƒ(x) which satisﬁes the equation and also satisﬁes the conditions at the ﬁxed ends of the
cable, called boundary conditions. This relationship deﬁnes the shape of
the cable, and we will use it to solve two important and limiting cases of
cable loading.

Parabolic Cable
When the intensity of vertical loading w is constant, the condition
closely approximates that of a suspension bridge where the uniform
weight of the roadway may be expressed by the constant w. The mass of
the cable itself is not distributed uniformly with the horizontal but is
relatively small, and thus we neglect its weight. For this limiting case
we will prove that the cable hangs in a parabolic arc.
We start with a cable suspended from two points A and B which are
not on the same horizontal line, Fig. 5/27a. We place the coordinate origin at the lowest point of the cable, where the tension is horizontal and
is T0. Integration of Eq. 5/13 once with respect to x gives
dy wx
ϩC
ϭ
dx
T0
where C is a constant of integration. For the coordinate axes chosen,
dy/dx ϭ 0 when x ϭ 0, so that C ϭ 0. Thus,
dy wx
ϭ
dx
T0
which deﬁnes the slope of the curve as a function of x. One further integration yields

͵

y

0

dy ϭ

͵

x

0

wx
dx
T0

yϭ

or

wx2
2T0

(5/14)

Alternatively, you should be able to obtain the identical results with
the indeﬁnite integral together with the evaluation of the constant of
lB

lA
A

y
x

y

B
hB

hA

sA
sB

T0

x

x/2

w = Load per unit of horizontal length

R = wx

(a)

(b)

Figure 5/27

θ
y

s
x

T

Flexible Cables

293

294

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces

integration. Equation 5/14 gives the shape of the cable, which we see is a
vertical parabola. The constant horizontal component of cable tension
becomes the cable tension at the origin.
Inserting the corresponding values x ϭ lA and y ϭ hA in Eq. 5/14
gives
T0 ϭ

wlA2
2hA

y ϭ hA(x/lA)2

so that

The tension T is found from a free-body diagram of a ﬁnite portion of
the cable, shown in Fig. 5/27b. From the Pythagorean theorem
T ϭ ΊT02 ϩ w2x2
Elimination of T0 gives
T ϭ wΊx2 ϩ (lA2/2hA)2

(5/15)

The maximum tension occurs where x ϭ lA and is
Tmax ϭ wlAΊ1 ϩ (lA/2hA)2

(5/15a)

We obtain the length sA of the cable from the origin to point A by integrating the expression for a differential length ds ϭ Ί(dx)2 ϩ (dy)2.
Thus,

͵

sA

0

ds ϭ

͵

lA

0

Ί1 ϩ (dy/dx)2 dx ϭ

͵

lA

0

Ί1 ϩ (wx/T0)2 dx

Although we can integrate this expression in closed form, for computational purposes it is more convenient to express the radical as a convergent series and then integrate it term by term. For this purpose we use
the binomial expansion
(1 ϩ x)n ϭ 1 ϩ nx ϩ

n(n Ϫ 1) 2 n(n Ϫ 1)(n Ϫ 2) 3
x ϩ
x ϩ ⅐⅐⅐
2!
3!

which converges for x2 Ͻ 1. Replacing x in the series by (wx/T0)2 and setting n ϭ 1 give the expression
2
sA ϭ

w
͵ ΂1 ϩ 2Tx
lA

0

΄

ϭ lA 1 ϩ

2 2
0

Ϫ

2

΂ ΃

2 hA
3 lA

2

΃

w4 x 4
ϩ ⅐ ⅐ ⅐ dx
8T04

Ϫ

΂ ΃

2 hA
5 lA

4

ϩ ⅐⅐⅐

΅

(5/16)

This series is convergent for values of hA/lA Ͻ 1, which holds for most
2
practical cases.
The relationships which apply to the cable section from the origin to
point B can be easily obtained by replacing hA, lA, and sA by hB, lB, and
sB, respectively.

Article 5/8

L
B

A
y
h
x

Figure 5/28
For a suspension bridge where the supporting towers are on the
same horizontal line, Fig. 5/28, the total span is L ϭ 2lA, the sag is h ϭ
hA, and the total length of the cable is S ϭ 2sA. With these substitutions,
the maximum tension and the total length become
Tmax ϭ

wL
Ί1 ϩ (L/4h)2
2

΄

΂΃

SϭL 1ϩ

8 h
3 L

2

Ϫ

΂΃

32 h
5 L

4

(5/15b)

ϩ ⅐⅐⅐

΅

(5/16a)

This series converges for all values of h/L Ͻ 1. In most cases h is much
4
smaller than L/4, so that the three terms of Eq. 5/16a give a sufﬁciently
accurate approximation.

Catenary Cable
Consider now a uniform cable, Fig. 5/29a, suspended from two
points A and B and hanging under the action of its own weight only. We
will show in this limiting case that the cable assumes a curved shape
known as a catenary.
The free-body diagram of a ﬁnite portion of the cable of length s
measured from the origin is shown in part b of the ﬁgure. This free-body
diagram differs from the one in Fig. 5/27b in that the total vertical force
supported is equal to the weight of the cable section of length s rather
y
lB

lA
A

y
x
hA

B
hB

sA
sB

x

x
T0
R = μs
(b)

Figure 5/29

θ
y

s

(a)

T

Flexible Cables

295

296

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces

than the load distributed uniformly with respect to the horizontal. If the
cable has a weight ␮ per unit of its length, the resultant R of the load is
R ϭ ␮s, and the incremental vertical load w dx of Fig. 5/26c is replaced
by ␮ ds. With this replacement the differential relation, Eq. 5/13, for the
cable becomes
d2y
dx2

ϭ

␮ ds
T0 dx

(5/17)

Because s ϭ ƒ(x, y), we must change this equation to one containing
only the two variables.
We may substitute the identity (ds)2 ϭ (dx)2 ϩ (dy)2 to obtain
d2y
dx

2

ϭ

␮
T0

dy
Ί ΂dx΃

2

1ϩ

(5/18)

Equation 5/18 is the differential equation of the curve (catenary) formed
by the cable. This equation is easier to solve if we substitute p ϭ dy/dx
to obtain
dp
Ί1 ϩ p2

ϭ

␮
dx
T0

Integrating this equation gives us
ln (p ϩ Ί1 ϩ p2) ϭ

␮
xϩC
T0

The constant C is zero because dy/dx ϭ p ϭ 0 when x ϭ 0. Substituting
p ϭ dy/dx, changing to exponential form, and clearing the equation of
the radical give
␮x
dy e␮x/T0 Ϫ eϪ␮x/T0
ϭ
ϭ sinh
dx
2
T0
where the hyperbolic function* is introduced for convenience. The slope
may be integrated to obtain
T0
␮x
y ϭ ␮ cosh
ϩK
T0
The integration constant K is evaluated from the boundary condition
x ϭ 0 when y ϭ 0. This substitution requires that K ϭ ϪT0/␮, and
hence,

΂

T0
␮x
Ϫ1
y ϭ ␮ cosh
T0

΃

(5/19)

*See Arts. C/8 and C/10, Appendix C, for the deﬁnition and integral of hyperbolic functions.

Article 5/8

Flexible Cables

297

Equation 5/19 is the equation of the curve (catenary) formed by the
cable hanging under the action of its weight only.
From the free-body diagram in Fig. 5/29b we see that dy/dx ϭ
tan ␪ ϭ ␮s/T0. Thus, from the previous expression for the slope,
T0
␮x
s ϭ ␮ sinh
T0

(5/20)

We obtain the tension T in the cable from the equilibrium triangle of
the forces in Fig. 5/29b. Thus,
T 2 ϭ ␮2s2 ϩ T02
which, when combined with Eq. 5/20, becomes

΂

T2 ϭ T02 1 ϩ sinh2

΃

␮x
␮x
ϭ T02 cosh2
T0
T0

or
T ϭ T0 cosh

␮x
T0

(5/21)

We may also express the tension in terms of y with the aid of Eq. 5/19,
which, when substituted into Eq. 5/21, gives
(5/22)

Equation 5/22 shows that the change in cable tension from that at the
lowest position depends only on ␮y.
Most problems dealing with the catenary involve solutions of Eqs.
5/19 through 5/22, which can be handled by a graphical approximation
or solved by computer. The procedure for a graphical or computer solution is illustrated in Sample Problem 5/17 following this article.
The solution of catenary problems where the sag-to-span ratio is
small may be approximated by the relations developed for the parabolic
cable. A small sag-to-span ratio means a tight cable, and the uniform
distribution of weight along the cable is not very different from the
same load intensity distributed uniformly along the horizontal.
Many problems dealing with both the catenary and parabolic cables
involve suspension points which are not on the same level. In such cases
we may apply the relations just developed to the part of the cable on
each side of the lowest point.

© Susana Carvalho/Fotolia

T ϭ T0 ϩ ␮y

In addition to the distributed weight
of the cable, these tramway cars
exert a concentrated load on the
suspending cable.

298

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces

SAMPLE PROBLEM 5/16

T

A 100-ft length of surveyor’s tape weights 0.6 lb. When the tape is stretched
between two points on the same level by a tension of 10 lb at each end, calculate
the sag h in the middle.

T
A

B

h

The weight per unit length is ␮ ϭ 0.6 /100 ϭ 0.006 lb /ft. The total
length is 2s ϭ 100 or s ϭ 50 ft.

Solution.

[T2 ϭ ␮2s2 ϩ T02]

102 ϭ (0.006)2 (50)2 ϩ T02

ᕡ

T0 ϭ 9.995 lb
[T ϭ T0 ϩ ␮y]

Helpful Hint

10 ϭ 9.995 ϩ 0.006h
h ϭ 0.750 ft

or

ᕡ An extra signiﬁcant ﬁgure is dis-

9.00 in.

Ans.

played here for clarity.

SAMPLE PROBLEM 5/17

300 m

The light cable supports a mass of 12 kg per meter of horizontal length and
is suspended between the two points on the same level 300 m apart. If the sag is
60 m, ﬁnd the tension at midlength, the maximum tension, and the total length
of the cable.

60 m

12 kg/m

With a uniform horizontal distribution of load, the solution of part
(b) of Art. 5/8 applies, and we have a parabolic shape for the cable. For h ϭ 60 m,
L ϭ 300 m, and w ϭ 12(9.81)(10Ϫ3) kN/m the relation following Eq. 5/14 with
lA ϭ L/2 gives for the midlength tension

Solution.

΄T ϭ 8h ΅
0

wL2

T0 ϭ

2

0.1177(300)
ϭ 22.1 kN
8(60)

Ans.

The maximum tension occurs at the supports and is given by Eq. 5/15b. Thus,

ᕡ

΄T

max

ϭ

wL
2

L
Ί1 ϩ ΂4h΃ ΅

Tmax

y

60 m
T0

75 m

75 m

x

R = 12(150)(9.81)(10–3)
= 17.66 kN

2

Tmax ϭ

Helpful Hint

12(9.81)(10Ϫ3)(300)
2

300
Ί1 ϩ ΂4(60)΃ ϭ 28.3 kN
2

Ans.

The sag-to-span ratio is 60/300 ϭ 1/5 Ͻ 1/4. Therefore, the series expression
developed in Eq. 5/16a is convergent, and we may write for the total length

΄

S ϭ 300 1 ϩ

΂΃

8 1
3 5

2

Ϫ

΂΃

32 1
5 5

4

ϩ…

΅

ϭ 300[1 ϩ 0.1067 Ϫ 0.01024 ϩ … ]
ϭ 329 m

Ans.

ᕡ Suggestion: Check the value of Tmax
directly from the free-body diagram
of the right-hand half of the cable,
from which a force polygon may be
drawn.

Article 5/8

SAMPLE PROBLEM 5/18

Solution. With a load distributed uniformly along the length of
the cable, the solution of part (c) of Art. 5/8 applies, and we have
a catenary shape of the cable. Equations 5/20 and 5/21 for the
cable length and tension both involve the minimum tension T0 at
midlength, which must be found from Eq. 5/19. Thus, for x ϭ 150 m,
y ϭ 60 m, and ␮ ϭ 12(9.81)(10Ϫ3) ϭ 0.1177 kN/m, we have

΄

΅

T0
(0.1177)(150)
60 ϭ
cosh
Ϫ1
0.1177
T0
17.66
7.06
ϭ cosh
Ϫ1
T0
T0

This equation can be solved graphically. We compute the expression on each side of the equals sign and plot it as a function of T0. The
intersection of the two curves establishes the equality and determines
the correct value of T0. This plot is shown in the ﬁgure accompanying
this problem and yields the solution

y
60 m
x

0.33

0.32
Solution
T0 = 23.2 kN
0.31
7.06

0.29
0.28
22.5

17.66 7.06
Ϫ
Ϫ1ϭ0
T0
T0

and set up a computer program to calculate the value(s) of T0 which renders
ƒ(T0) ϭ 0. See Art. C/11 of Appendix C for an explanation of one applicable numerical method.
The maximum tension occurs for maximum y and from Eq. 5/22 is
Ans.

ᕡ From Eq. 5/20 the total length of the cable becomes
2s ϭ 2

(0.1177)(150)
23.2
sinh
ϭ 330 m
0.1177
23.2

(cosh

17.66
——– – 1
T0

(

23.0

23.5
T0, kN

Alternatively, we may write the equation as

Tmax ϭ 23.2 ϩ (0.1177)(60) ϭ 30.2 kN

(——– (
T0

0.30

T0 ϭ 23.2 kN

ƒ(T0) ϭ cosh

299

300 m

Replace the cable of Sample Problem 5/17, which is loaded uniformly along the horizontal, by a cable which has a mass of 12 kg per
meter of its own length and supports its own weight only. The cable is
suspended between two points on the same level 300 m apart and has a
sag of 60 m. Find the tension at midlength, the maximum tension, and
the total length of the cable.

or

Flexible Cables

Ans.

Helpful Hint

ᕡ Note that the solution of Sample Problem 5/17 for the parabolic cable gives a
very close approximation to the values for the catenary even though we have
a fairly large sag. The approximation is even better for smaller sag-to-span
ratios.

24.0

300

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces

PROBLEMS
(The problems marked with an asterisk (*) involve transcendental equations which may be solved with a computer
or by graphical methods.)

* 5/158 A power tug is towing a barge with a cable which
has a mass of 14 kg per meter of its length. It is
observed that the tangent to the cable at point A is
horizontal. Determine the tensions at A and B.
5m

Introductory Problems

65 m

B

A

5/155 A mason stretches a string between two points
50 ft apart on the same level with a tension of 10 lb
at each end. If the string weighs 0.1 lb, determine
the sag h at the middle of the string.
5/156 The Golden Gate Bridge in San Francisco has a
main span of 4200 ft, a sag of 470 ft, and a total static loading of 21,300 lb per lineal foot of horizontal
measurement. The weight of both of the main cables is included in this ﬁgure and is assumed to be
uniformly distributed along the horizontal. The
angle made by the cable with the horizontal at the
top of the tower is the same on each side of each
tower. Calculate the midspan tension T0 in each of
the main cables and the compressive force C exerted by each cable on the top of each tower.

Problem 5/158

5/159 A cable weighing 25 newtons per meter of length is
suspended from point A and passes over the small
pulley at B. Calculate the mass m of the attached
cylinder which will produce the sag of 9 m. Also
determine the horizontal distance from A to C.
Because of the small sag-to-span ratio, use the approximation of a parabolic cable.
100 m
B

12 m
A

C

9m

470′
m
Problem 5/159
4200′

* 5/160 Repeat Prob. 5/159, but do not use the approximation of a parabolic cable. Compare your results
with the printed answers for Prob. 5/159.

Problem 5/156

5/157 The left-to-right current in the stream causes a
uniform drag of 4 lb per cross-stream foot on the
ﬂoating cable which is attached to posts A and B.
Determine the minimum and maximum tensions
in the cable and the location of each.

5/161 A cable supports a load of 40 kg /m uniformly distributed along the horizontal and is suspended
from two ﬁxed points A and B located as shown.
Calculate the cable tensions at A and B and the
minimum tension T0.
100 m

A

B
A

10 m
10 m

24′

C
40 kg/m
Problem 5/161
B
16′
Problem 5/157

Article 5/8
5/162 The light cable has zero slope at its lower point
of attachment and supports the unit load which
varies linearly with x from w0 to w1 as shown. Derive the expression for the tension T0 in the cable
at the origin.

Problems

301

* 5/165 A light ﬁxture is suspended from the ceiling of
an outside portico. Four chains, two of which are
shown, prevent excessive motion of the ﬁxture
during windy conditions. If the chains weigh 15 lb
per foot of length, determine the chain tension at
C and the length L of chain BC.

y
l
A

B

C
5′

h

x

w0

20′

w1

Problem 5/165
Problem 5/162

5/163 The cable of negligible mass is suspended from the
two ﬁxed points shown, and the tension at the
lower support is sufﬁcient to maintain zero slope
of the cable at that point. The cable supports a
unit load w which decreases from 100 lb /ft at x = 0
to 40 lb/ft at x ϭ 30 ft with the decrease proportional to x2. Determine the equation of the curve
assumed by the cable.

Representative Problems
* 5/166 Find the total length L of cable which will have the
conﬁguration shown when suspended from points
A and B.
40 m
A

y
8m

30′

B
6m

10′
Problem 5/166
x
40 lb/ft

100
lb/ft
Problem 5/163

5/164 Expand Eq. 5/19 in a power series for cosh (␮x /T0)
and show that the equation for the parabola, Eq.
5/14, is obtained by taking only the ﬁrst two terms
in the series. (See Art. C/8, Appendix C, for the series expansion of the hyperbolic function.)

* 5/167 The glider A is being towed in level ﬂight and is
400 ft behind and 100 ft below the tow plane B.
The tangent to the cable at the glider is horizontal.
The cable weighs 0.5 lb per foot of length. Calculate the horizontal tension T0 in the cable at the
glider. Neglect air resistance and compare your result with that obtained by approximating the cable
shape by a parabola.
400′
B

100′
A
Problem 5/167

302

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces

5/168 In setting its anchor in 100 ft of water, a small
power boat reverses its propeller, which gives a reverse thrust P ϭ 800 lb. A total of 400 ft of anchor
chain from anchor to bow has been released.
The chain weighs 1.63 lb /ft, and the upward force
due to water buoyancy is 0.21 lb /ft. Calculate the
length l of chain in contact with the bottom.

P
100′

* 5/171 A small remotely-controlled underwater robotic
vehicle and its tether are positioned as shown.
The neutrally buoyant vehicle has independent
thrusters for horizontal and vertical control. The
tether, designed to be very slightly buoyant, has a
net upward force of 0.025 N per meter of its length
acting on it. There are 60.5 m of cable between
points A and B. Determine the horizontal and vertical forces which the vehicle must exert on the
cable at B in order to maintain the conﬁguration
shown. Also, ﬁnd the distance h. Assume that the
tether between points A and B is entirely under
water.
TC

l

C
Problem 5/168
A

B

h

* 5/169 Find the total length L of chain which will have a
sag of 6 ft when suspended from two points on the
same horizontal line 30 ft apart.

Th
Tv
60 m

30′
Problem 5/171
6′

Problem 5/169

* 5/170 Calculate the tension T required to steadily pull the
cable over a roller support on the utility pole. Neglect the effects of friction at the support. The cable,
which is horizontal at A, has a mass of 3 kg /m. Also
determine the length of cable from A to B.
B

T

* 5/172 The remotely-controlled robotic vehicle of Prob.
5/171 is now connected to a 200-m tether which
has a slight negative buoyancy in that a net downward force of 0.025 N per meter of its length acts
on it. Determine the horizontal and vertical components of thrust which must be produced in order
to hold the vehicle in the position shown. The vehicle itself is neutrally buoyant.

A
10 m
10 m

Tv
B
Th

A
197 m
30 m
Problem 5/170
Problem 5/172

Article 5/8
5/173 A ﬂoating dredge is anchored in position with a
single stern cable which has a horizontal direction
at the attachment A and extends a horizontal distance of 250 m to an anchorage B on shore. A tension of 300 kN is required in the cable at A. If the
cable has a mass of 22 kg per meter of its length,
compute the required height H of the anchorage
above water level and ﬁnd the length s of cable between A and B.

Problems

303

* 5/176 A spherical buoy used to mark the course for a sailboat race is shown in the ﬁgure. There is a water
current from left to right which causes a horizontal drag on the buoy; the effect of the current on
the cable can be neglected. The length of the cable
between points A and B is 87 m, and the effective
cable mass is 2 kg /m when the buoyancy of the
cable is accounted for. Determine the tensions at
both A and B.

B
A

2m

H

B

250 m

80 m

Problem 5/173
A

* 5/174 A cable which weighs 50 newtons per meter of
length is secured at point A and passes over the
small pulley at B on the same level under a tension
T. Determine the minimum value of T to support
the cable and the corresponding deﬂection h.
100 m
A

T

B
h
Problem 5/174

* 5/175 A series of spherical ﬂoats are equally spaced and
securely fastened to a ﬂexible cable of length 20 m.
Ends A and B are anchored 16 m apart to the bottom of a fresh-water lake at a depth of 8 m. The
ﬂoats and cable have a combined weight of 100 N
per meter of cable length, and the buoyancy of the
water produces an upward force of 560 N per
meter of cable length. Calculate the depth h below
the surface to the top of the line of ﬂoats. Also ﬁnd
the angle ␪ made by the line of ﬂoats with the horizontal at A.

h

32 m
Problem 5/176

* 5/177 Numerous small ﬂotation devices are attached to
the cable, and the difference between buoyancy
and weight results in a net upward force of 30
newtons per meter of cable length. Determine the
force T which must be applied to cause the cable
conﬁguration shown.
B

T

8m
A

25 m
Problem 5/177

* 5/178 A cable installation crew wishes to establish the
dependence of the tension T on the cable sag h.
Plot both the minimum tension T0 and the tension
T at the supports A and B as functions of h for
1 Յ h Յ 10 m. The cable mass per unit length is
3 kg /m. State the values of T0 and T for h = 2 m.

8m
60 m
T
A

θ

B
16 m
Problem 5/175

T
A

h
Problem 5/178

B

304

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces

* 5/179 The tree surgeon attempts to pull down the partially sawn-through tree trunk. He creates a tension TA ϭ 200 N in the rope, which has a mass of
0.6 kg per meter of its length. Determine the angle
␪A at which he pulls, the length L of rope between
points A and B, and the tension TB at point B.
12 m

B

5m
θA

TA

* 5/181 A length of cable which has a mass of 1.2 kg /m is
to have a sag of 2.4 m when suspended from the
two points A and B on the same horizontal line
10 m apart. For comparison purposes, determine the
length L of cable required and plot its conﬁguration for the two cases of (a) assuming a parabolic
shape and (b) using the proper catenary model. In
order to more clearly distinguish between the two
cases, also plot the difference (yC – yP) as a function of x, where C and P refer to catenary and
parabola, respectively. Use the approximation as
stated in Eqs. (5/16) and (5/16a) as needed.

A

10 m
B

A

y

2.4 m

Problem 5/179

* 5/180 Reconsider Prob. 5/179. If the length of the rope
between points A and B is 13.02 m, determine the
tension TA which the tree surgeon must exert at A,
the angle ␪A at which he pulls, the tension TB at B,
and the angle ␪B which the rope makes with the
horizontal at B. The rope has a mass of 0.6 kg per
meter of its length.

x
Problem 5/181

* 5/182 A 50-kg trafﬁc signal is suspended by two 21-m
cables which have a mass of 1.2 kg per meter of
length. Determine the vertical deﬂection ␦ of the
junction ring A relative to its position before the
signal is added.
20 m

20 m
B

C
A

50 kg
Problem 5/182

Article 5/8
* 5/183 For aesthetic reasons, chains are sometimes used
instead of downspouts on small buildings in order
to direct roof runoff water from the gutter down to
ground level. The architect of the illustrated building speciﬁed a 6-m vertical chain from A to B, but
the builder decided to use a 6.1-m chain from A to C
as shown in order to place the water farther from
the structure. By what percentage n did the
builder increase the magnitude of the force exerted
on the gutter at A over that ﬁgured by the architect? The chain weighs 100 N per meter of its
length.

305

᭤*5/184 The underwater cable is constructed of two portions. Portion 1 of length 130 m has a net downward force of 0.025 N per meter of its length acting
on it. Portion 2 of length 77 m has a net upward
force of 0.03 N per meter of its length acting on it.
Plot the overall cable conﬁguration. What are the
coordinates of the junction point B? (Note: The difﬁculty level of this problem is well above average!)
y

A

50 m

x
1
B

A

2
C

200 m

Problem 5/184
6m

C

Problems

B
1m

Problem 5/183

306

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces

5/9

Fluid Statics

So far in this chapter we have treated the action of forces on and between solid bodies. In this article we consider the equilibrium of bodies
subjected to forces due to ﬂuid pressures. A ﬂuid is any continuous substance which, when at rest, is unable to support shear force. A shear
force is one tangent to the surface on which it acts and is developed
when differential velocities exist between adjacent layers of ﬂuids. Thus,
a ﬂuid at rest can exert only normal forces on a bounding surface. Fluids
may be either gaseous or liquid. The statics of ﬂuids is generally called
hydrostatics when the ﬂuid is a liquid and aerostatics when the ﬂuid is
a gas.

Fluid Pressure
The pressure at any given point in a ﬂuid is the same in all directions (Pascal’s law). We may prove this by considering the equilibrium
of an inﬁnitesimal triangular prism of ﬂuid as shown in Fig. 5/30. The
ﬂuid pressures normal to the faces of the element are p1, p2, p3, and p4 as
shown. With force equal to pressure times area, the equilibrium of
forces in the x- and y-directions gives

y

dx dy
p4 ——–
2

dz
p1 dy dz
dy
θ

p3 ds dz

ds

x

dx dy dx
p4 ——–
p2 dx dz
2

p1 ϭ p2 ϭ p3 ϭ p

p dA
h
dh

(p + dp)dA

Figure 5/31

p2 dx dz ϭ p3 ds dz cos ␪

Since ds sin ␪ ϭ dy and ds cos ␪ ϭ dx, these questions require that

Figure 5/30

ρ g dA dh

p1 dy dz ϭ p3 ds dz sin ␪

By rotating the element through 90Њ, we see that p4 is also equal to the
other pressures. Thus, the pressure at any point in a ﬂuid at rest is
the same in all directions. In this analysis we need not account for the
weight of the ﬂuid element because, when the weight per unit volume
(density ␳ times g) is multiplied by the volume of the element, a differential quantity of third order results which disappears in the limit compared with the second-order pressure-force terms.
In all ﬂuids at rest the pressure is a function of the vertical dimension. To determine this function, we consider the forces acting on a differential element of a vertical column of ﬂuid of cross-sectional area dA,
as shown in Fig. 5/31. The positive direction of vertical measurement h
is taken downward. The pressure on the upper face is p, and that on the
lower face is p plus the change in p, or p ϩ dp. The weight of the element equals ␳g multiplied by its volume. The normal forces on the lateral surface, which are horizontal and do not affect the balance of forces
in the vertical direction, are not shown. Equilibrium of the ﬂuid element
in the h-direction requires
p dA ϩ ␳g dA dh Ϫ (p ϩ dp) dA ϭ 0
dp ϭ ␳g dh

(5/23)

This differential relation shows us that the pressure in a ﬂuid increases
with depth or decreases with increased elevation. Equation 5/23 holds

Article 5/9

for both liquids and gases, and agrees with our common observations of
air and water pressures.
Fluids which are essentially incompressible are called liquids, and
for most practical purposes we may consider their density ␳ constant for
every part of the liquid.* With ␳ a constant, integration of Eq. 5/23 gives
p ϭ p0 ϩ ␳gh

(5/24)

The pressure p0 is the pressure on the surface of the liquid where h ϭ 0.
If p0 is due to atmospheric pressure and the measuring instrument
records only the increment above atmospheric pressure,† the measurement gives what is called gage pressure. It is computed from p ϭ ␳gh.
The common unit for pressure in SI units is the kilopascal (kPa),
which is the same as a kilonewton per square meter (103 N/m2). In computing pressure, if we use Mg/m3 for ␳, m/s2 for g, and m for h, then the
product ␳gh gives us pressure in kPa directly. For example, the pressure
at a depth of 10 m in fresh water is

΂

p ϭ ␳gh ϭ 1.0

Mg
m3

΃΂9.81 m΃(10 m) ϭ 98.1΂10
s
2

3

kg ⅐ m 1
s2 m2

΃

ϭ 98.1 kN/m2 ϭ 98.1 kPa
In the U.S. customary system, ﬂuid pressure is generally expressed
in pounds per square inch (lb/in.2) or occasionally in pounds per square
foot (lb/ft2). Thus, at a depth of 10 ft in fresh water the pressure is

΂

p ϭ ␳gh ϭ 62.4

lb
ft3

1 ft
΃΂1728 in. ΃(120 in.) ϭ 4.33 lb/in.
3

2

3

Hydrostatic Pressure on Submerged Rectangular Surfaces
A body submerged in a liquid, such as a gate valve in a dam or the
wall of a tank, is subjected to ﬂuid pressure acting normal to its surface
and distributed over its area. In problems where ﬂuid forces are appreciable, we must determine the resultant force due to the distribution of
pressure on the surface and the position at which this resultant acts.
For systems open to the atmosphere, the atmospheric pressure p0 acts
over all surfaces and thus yields a zero resultant. In such cases, then, we
need to consider only the gage pressure p ϭ ␳gh, which is the increment
above atmospheric pressure.
Consider the special but common case of the action of hydrostatic
pressure on the surface of a rectangular plate submerged in a liquid.
Figure 5/32a shows such a plate 1-2-3-4 with its top edge horizontal and
with the plane of the plate making an arbitrary angle ␪ with the vertical
plane. The horizontal surface of the liquid is represented by the x-yЈ
plane. The ﬂuid pressure (gage) acting normal to the plate at point 2 is
*See Table D/1, Appendix D, for table of densities.
†

Atmospheric pressure at sea level may be taken to be 101.3 kPa or 14.7 lb/in.2

Fluid Statics

307

308

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces

represented by the arrow 6-2 and equals ␳g times the vertical distance
from the liquid surface to point 2. This same pressure acts at all points
along the edge 2-3. At point 1 on the lower edge, the ﬂuid pressure
equals ␳g times the depth of point 1, and this pressure is the same at all
points along edge 1-4. The variation of pressure p over the area of the
plate is governed by the linear depth relationship and therefore it is represented by the arrow p, shown in Fig. 5/32b, which varies linearly from
the value 6-2 to the value 5-1. The resultant force produced by this pressure distribution is represented by R, which acts at some point P called
the center of pressure.
The conditions which prevail at the vertical section 1-2-6-5 in Fig.
5/32a are identical to those at section 4-3-7-8 and at every other vertical
section normal to the plate. Thus, we may analyze the problem from the
two-dimensional view of a vertical section as shown in Fig. 5/32b for section 1-2-6-5. For this section the pressure distribution is trapezoidal. If b
is the horizontal width of the plate measured normal to the plane of the
ﬁgure (dimension 2-3 in Fig. 5/32a), an element of plate area over which

Liquid
surface

y′
7

3

θ

b

x

6

R
4

–
y

O

C

8

2

P

5
1
(a)

B

y′

y′

θ
6
dA′

y
2

p

6 p
2

L /2
–
–
Y

R
dy

C

R1

P

5

R2

L/3

L

5
p1

1

1
(b)

(c)

Figure 5/32

2

Article 5/9

Fluid Statics

309

the pressure p ϭ ␳gh acts is dA ϭ b dy, and an increment of the resultant force is dR ϭ p dA ϭ bp dy. But p dy is merely the shaded increment
of trapezoidal area dAЈ, so that dR ϭ b dAЈ. We may therefore express
the resultant force acting on the entire plate as the trapezoidal area
1-2-6-5 times the width b of the plate,
Rϭb

͵ dAЈ ϭ bAЈ

Be careful not to confuse the physical area A of the plate with the geometrical area AЈ deﬁned by the trapezoidal distribution of pressure.
The trapezoidal area representing the pressure distribution is easily
expressed by using its average altitude. The resultant force R may
therefore be written in terms of the average pressure pav ϭ 1( p1 ϩ p2)
2
times the plate area A. The average pressure is also the pressure which
exists at the average depth, measured to the centroid O of the plate. An
alternative expression for R is therefore

y′
R

b
x

A

R ϭ pav A ϭ ␳ghA
where h ϭ y cos ␪.
We obtain the line of action of the resultant force R from the principle of moments. Using the x-axis (point B in Fig. 5/32b) as the moment
axis yields RY ϭ ͐ y(pb dy). Substituting p dy ϭ dAЈ and R ϭ bAЈ and
canceling b give
Yϭ

B
(a)

͵ y dAЈ
͵ dAЈ

which is simply the expression for the centroidal coordinate of the trapezoidal area AЈ. In the two-dimensional view, therefore, the resultant R
passes through the centroid C of the trapezoidal area deﬁned by the
pressure distribution in the vertical section. Clearly Y also locates the
centroid C of the truncated prism 1-2-3-4-5-6-7-8 in Fig. 5/32a through
which the resultant passes.
For a trapezoidal distribution of pressure, we may simplify the calculation by dividing the trapezoid into a rectangle and a triangle, Fig.
5/32c, and separately considering the force represented by each part.
The force represented by the rectangular portion acts at the center O of
the plate and is R2 ϭ p2A, where A is the area 1-2-3-4 of the plate. The
force R1 represented by the triangular increment of pressure distribution is 1( p1 Ϫ p2)A and acts through the centroid of the triangular
2
portion shown.

Hydrostatic Pressure on Cylindrical Surfaces
The determination of the resultant R due to distributed pressure on
a submerged curved surface involves more calculation than for a ﬂat
surface. For example, consider the submerged cylindrical surface shown
in Fig. 5/33a where the elements of the curved surface are parallel to the
horizontal surface x-yЈ of the liquid. Vertical sections perpendicular to the
surface all disclose the same curve AB and the same pressure distribution.

y′

R
A
p

x
dL

B

y

(b)

Py
C

A

Px
B

W

R

y
(c)

Figure 5/33

x

310

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces

Thus, the two-dimensional representation in Fig. 5/33b may be used.
To ﬁnd R by a direct integration, we need to integrate the x- and ycomponents of dR along the curve AB, since dR continuously changes
direction. Thus,

͵ ( p dL) ϭ b ͵ p dy

Rx ϭ b

Ry ϭ b

and

x

͵ ( p dL) ϭ b ͵ p dx
y

A moment equation would now be required if we wished to establish the
position of R.
A second method for finding R is usually much simpler. Consider
the equilibrium of the block of liquid ABC directly above the surface,
shown in Fig. 5/33c. The resultant R then appears as the equal and
opposite reaction of the surface on the block of liquid. The resultants
of the pressures along AC and CB are Py and Px, respectively, and are
easily obtained. The weight W of the liquid block is calculated from
the area ABC of its section multiplied by the constant dimension b
and by ␳g. The weight W passes through the centroid of area ABC.
The equilibrant R is then determined completely from the equilibrium equations which we apply to the free-body diagram of the fluid
block.

Hydrostatic Pressure on Flat Surfaces of Any Shape
Figure 5/34a shows a flat plate of any shape submerged in a liquid. The horizontal surface of the liquid is the plane x-yЈ, and the
plane of the plate makes an angle ␪ with the vertical. The force acting
on a differential strip of area dA parallel to the surface of the liquid
is dR ϭ p dA ϭ ␳gh dA. The pressure p has the same magnitude
throughout the length of the strip, because there is no change of

y′

θ
p=

y

ρ gh

h

–
h

dA
R

O

θ

y′
x

C

O

dy

A

(a)

(b)

Figure 5/34

–
y

p

P

P

x

y

x

R

–
–
Y

Article 5/9

Fluid Statics

311

depth along the strip. We obtain the total force acting on the exposed
area A by integration, which gives
Rϭ

͵ dR ϭ ͵ p dA ϭ ␳g ͵ h dA

Substituting the centroidal relation hA ϭ ͐ h dA gives us
R ϭ ␳ghA

(5/25)

Rϭ

© Angelo Cavalli/The Image Bank/Getty Images

The quantity ␳gh is the pressure which exists at the depth of the centroid O of the area and is the average pressure over the area.
We may also represent the resultant R geometrically by the volume
VЈ of the ﬁgure shown in Fig. 5/34b. Here the ﬂuid pressure p is represented as a dimension normal to the plate regarded as a base. We see
that the resulting volume is a truncated right cylinder. The force dR
acting on the differential area dA ϭ x dy is represented by the elemental
volume p dA shown by the shaded slice, and the total force is represented by the total volume of the cylinder. We see from Eq. 5/25 that the
average altitude of the truncated cylinder is the average pressure ␳gh
which exists at a depth corresponding to the centroid O of the area exposed to pressure.
For problems where the centroid O or the volume VЈ is not readily
apparent, a direct integration may be performed to obtain R. Thus,

͵ dR ϭ ͵ p dA ϭ ͵ ␳ghx dy

where the depth h and the length x of the horizontal strip of differential
area must be expressed in terms of y to carry out the integration.
After the resultant is obtained, we must determine its location.
Using the principle of moments with the x-axis of Fig. 5/34b as the moment axis, we obtain

RY ϭ

͵ y dR

or

Yϭ

͵ y(px dy)
͵ px dy

Glen Canyon Dam at Lake Powell,
Arizona

(5/26)

This second relation satisﬁes the deﬁnition of the coordinate Y to the
centroid of the volume VЈ of the pressure-area truncated cylinder. We
conclude, therefore, that the resultant R passes through the centroid C
of the volume described by the plate area as base and the linearly varying pressure as the perpendicular coordinate. The point P at which R is
applied to the plate is the center of pressure. Note that the center of
pressure P and the centroid O of the plate area are not the same.

Buoyancy
Archimedes is credited with discovering the principle of buoyancy.
This principle is easily explained for any ﬂuid, gaseous or liquid, in equilibrium. Consider a portion of the ﬂuid deﬁned by an imaginary closed

312

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces

mg

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 5/35

© John Lambert TIPS RF/Stockphotopro, Inc.

surface, as illustrated by the irregular dashed boundary in Fig. 5/35a. If
the body of the ﬂuid could be sucked out from within the closed cavity
and replaced simultaneously by the forces which it exerted on the
boundary of the cavity, Fig. 5/35b, the equilibrium of the surrounding
ﬂuid would not be disturbed. Furthermore, a free-body diagram of the
ﬂuid portion before removal, Fig. 5/35c, shows that the resultant of the
pressure forces distributed over its surface must be equal and opposite
to its weight mg and must pass through the center of mass of the ﬂuid
element. If we replace the ﬂuid element by a body of the same dimensions, the surface forces acting on the body held in this position will be
identical to those acting on the ﬂuid element. Thus, the resultant force
exerted on the surface of an object immersed in a ﬂuid is equal and opposite to the weight of ﬂuid displaced and passes through the center of
mass of the displaced ﬂuid. This resultant force is called the force of
buoyancy
F ϭ ␳gV

The designers of high-performance
sailboats must consider both airpressure distributions on the sails
and water-pressure distributions
on the hull.

(5/27)

where ␳ is the density of the ﬂuid, g is the acceleration due to gravity,
and V is the volume of the ﬂuid displaced. In the case of a liquid whose
density is constant, the center of mass of the displaced liquid coincides
with the centroid of the displaced volume.
Thus when the density of an object is less than the density of the
ﬂuid in which it is fully immersed, there is an imbalance of force in the
vertical direction, and the object rises. When the immersing ﬂuid is a
liquid, the object continues to rise until it comes to the surface of the liquid and then comes to rest in an equilibrium position, assuming that the
density of the new ﬂuid above the surface is less than the density of the
object. In the case of the surface boundary between a liquid and a gas,
such as water and air, the effect of the gas pressure on that portion of
the ﬂoating object above the liquid is balanced by the added pressure in
the liquid due to the action of the gas on its surface.
An important problem involving buoyancy is the determination of
the stability of a ﬂoating object, such as a ship hull shown in cross section in an upright position in Fig. 5/36a. Point B is the centroid of the
displaced volume and is called the center of buoyancy. The resultant of
the forces exerted on the hull by the water pressure is the buoyancy
force F which passes through B and is equal and opposite to the weight
W of the ship. If the ship is caused to list through an angle ␣, Fig. 5/36b,

Article 5/9
α
M

h
G
B

G

G
W

M

W = mg

(a) F

(b)

B′

F

B′

(c)

W

F

Figure 5/36

© Stocktrek Images, Inc.

the shape of the displaced volume changes, and the center of buoyancy
shifts to BЈ.
The point of intersection of the vertical line through BЈ with the
centerline of the ship is called the metacenter M, and the distance h of M
from the center of mass G is called the metacentric height. For most hull
shapes h remains practically constant for angles of list up to about 20Њ.
When M is above G, as in Fig. 5/36b, there is a righting moment which
tends to bring the ship back to its upright position. If M is below G, as
for the hull of Fig. 5/36c, the moment accompanying the list is in the direction to increase the list. This is clearly a condition of instability and
must be avoided in the design of any ship.

Wind-tunnel testing of a scale model can be useful in
predicting the performance of the full-size aircraft.

Fluid Statics

313

314

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces

SAMPLE PROBLEM 5/19

A

A rectangular plate, shown in vertical section AB, is 4 m high and 6 m wide
(normal to the plane of the paper) and blocks the end of a fresh-water channel 3 m
deep. The plate is hinged about a horizontal axis along its upper edge through A
and is restrained from opening by the ﬁxed ridge B which bears horizontally against
the lower edge of the plate. Find the force B exerted on the plate by the ridge.

1m

3m
B

The free-body diagram of the plate is shown in section and includes
the vertical and horizontal components of the force at A, the unspeciﬁed weight
W ϭ mg of the plate, the unknown horizontal force B, and the resultant R of the
triangular distribution of pressure against the vertical face.
The density of fresh water is ␳ ϭ 1.000 Mg/m3 so that the average pressure is

Solution.

ᕡ [pav ϭ ␳gh]

y
Ay
x

3(265) Ϫ 4B ϭ 0

B ϭ 198.7 kN

4m

R

R ϭ (14.72)(3)(6) ϭ 265 kN

1m

This force acts through the centroid of the triangular distribution of pressure,
which is 1 m above the bottom of the plate. A zero moment summation about A
establishes the unknown force B. Thus,
[ΣMA ϭ 0]

mg

2m

The resultant R of the pressure forces against the plate becomes
[R ϭ pavA]

Ax

pav ϭ 1.000(9.81)(3) ϭ 14.72 kPa
2

Ans.

B

Helpful Hint

ᕡ Note that the units of pressure ␳gh are
kg
΂10 m ΃΂m΃(m) ϭ ΂10
s
3

3

3

2

kg ⅐ m
s2

1
΃΂m ΃
2

ϭ kN/m2 ϭ kPa.

SAMPLE PROBLEM 5/20
The air space in the closed fresh-water tank is maintained at a pressure of
0.80 lb/in.2 (above atmospheric). Determine the resultant force R exerted by the
air and water on the end of the tank.

25″

A
8″

Water

Solution. The pressure distribution on the end surface is shown, where p0 ϭ
0.80 lb/in.2 The speciﬁc weight of fresh water is ␮ ϭ ␳g ϭ 62.4/1728 ϭ 0.0361
lb/in.3 so that the increment of pressure ⌬p due to the water is

Air

30″

p0

⌬p ϭ ␮ ⌬h ϭ 0.0361(30) ϭ 1.083 lb/in.2

ᕡ The resultant forces R1 and R2 due to the rectangular and triangular distribu-

1166h ϭ 760(19) ϩ 406(28)

h ϭ 22.1 in.

28″

R2

1.083
(30)(25) ϭ 406 lb
2

Δp

p0

B

Ans.

We locate R by applying the moment principle about A noting that R1 acts
through the center of the 38-in. depth and that R2 acts through the centroid of
the triangular pressure distribution 20 in. below the surface of the water and
20 ϩ 8 ϭ 28 in. below A. Thus,
[Rh ϭ ΣMA]

19″ h

R

R1 ϭ p0A1 ϭ 0.80(38)(25) ϭ 760 lb

The resultant is then R ϭ R1 ϩ R2 ϭ 760 ϩ 406 ϭ 1166 lb.

End view

A

R1

tions of pressure, respectively, are

R2 ϭ ⌬pavA2 ϭ

B

Side view

Ans.

Helpful Hint

ᕡ Dividing the pressure distribution
into these two parts is decidedly the
simplest way in which to make the
calculation.

Article 5/9

SAMPLE PROBLEM 5/21

O

Determine completely the resultant force R exerted on the cylindrical dam
surface by the water. The density of fresh water is 1.000 Mg/m3, and the dam has
a length b, normal to the paper, of 30 m.

D

B

The circular block of water BDO is isolated and its free-body diagram is drawn. The force Px is
Px ϭ ␳ghA ϭ

␳gr
(1.000)(9.81)(4)
br ϭ
(30)(4) ϭ 2350 kN
2
2

O

D
mg

The weight W of the water passes through the mass center G of the quartercircular section and is
␲(4)2
mg ϭ ␳gV ϭ (1.000)(9.81)
(30) ϭ 3700 kN
4

C

[ΣFy ϭ 0]

Ry ϭ mg ϭ 3700 kN

[R ϭ ΊRx ϩ Ry

2]

Rϭ

Ί(2350)2

ϩ

(3700)2

R

ϭ 4380 kN

O

2350

Ans.

xϭ

16
΂4΃ ϩ 3700΂3␲΃
3
3700

r

ϭ 2.55 m

Ans.

by a direct integration of the components

where p ϭ ␳gh ϭ ␳gr sin ␪ and dA ϭ b(r d␪). Thus,
Rx ϭ

͵

Ry ϭ

͵

␲/2

␳gr2b sin ␪ cos ␪ d␪ ϭ Ϫ␳gr2b

0
␲/2

0

΄

0

ϭ 1␲␳gr2b
4

Thus, R ϭ ΊRx2 ϩ Ry2 ϭ 1␳gr2bΊ1 ϩ ␲2/4. Substituting the numerical values gives
2
R ϭ 1(1.000)(9.81)(42)(30)Ί1 ϩ ␲2/4 ϭ 4380 kN
2

Ans.

Since dR always passes through point O, we see that R also passes through
O and, therefore, the moments of Rx and Ry about O must cancel. So we write
Rxy1 ϭ Ryx1, which gives us
1

1

x1/y1 ϭ Rx/Ry ϭ (2␳gr2b)/(4␲␳gr2b) ϭ 2/␲
By similar triangles we see that
x/r ϭ x1/y1 ϭ 2/␲

and

B

x

A

Helpful Hints

ᕡ See note ᕡ in Sample Problem 5/19

ble here mainly because of the simple
geometry of the circular arc.

ϭ 1␳gr2b
2

0
␲/2

΅

␪ sin 2␪
␳gr2b sin2 ␪ d␪ ϭ ␳gr2b Ϫ
2
4

R

ᕢ This approach by integration is feasi-

␲/2

΄cos42␪΅

r sin θ

if there is any question about the
units for ␳gh.

dRy ϭ p dA sin ␪

and

p
y1

x1

ᕢ Alternative Solution. The force acting on the dam surface may be obtained
dRx ϭ p dA cos ␪

D

θ

The x-coordinate of the point A through which R passes may be found from the
principle of moments. Using B as a moment center gives
r
4r
Px ϩ mg
Ϫ Ryx ϭ 0,
3
3␲

x

y

The resultant force R exerted by the ﬂuid on the dam is equal and opposite
to that shown acting on the ﬂuid and is
2

A

B

Rx ϭ Px ϭ 2350 kN

x

G
Px

Equilibrium of the section of water requires
[ΣFx ϭ 0]

315

r=4m

Solution.

ᕡ

Fluid Statics

x ϭ 2r/␲ ϭ 2(4)/␲ ϭ 2.55 m

Ans.

316

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces

SAMPLE PROBLEM 5/22
Determine the resultant force R exerted on the semicircular end of the
water tank shown in the ﬁgure if the tank is ﬁlled to capacity. Express the result
in terms of the radius r and the water density ␳.

r

We will obtain R ﬁrst by a direct integration. With a horizontal
strip of area dA ϭ 2x dy acted on by the pressure p ϭ ␳gy, the increment of the
resultant force is dR ϭ p dA so that

Solution I.

Rϭ

͵ p dA ϭ ͵ ␳gy(2x dy) ϭ 2␳g ͵

0

yΊr2 Ϫ y2 dy

͵ y dR]

Integrating gives

2
3
3 ␳gr Y ϭ 2␳g

␳gr4 ␲
2
3
3 ␳gr Y ϭ 4 2

͵

y

Helpful Hint
and

3␲r
Yϭ
16

Ans.

We may use Eq. 5/25 directly to ﬁnd R, where the average pressure is ␳gh and h is the coordinate to the centroid of the area over which the
pressure acts. For a semicircular area, h ϭ 4r/(3␲).
R ϭ ␳g

C
R

y2Ίr2 Ϫ y2 dy

Solution II.

[R ϭ ␳ghA]

–
–
dy Y

r

0

y

Ans.

The location of R is determined by using the principle of moments. Taking
moments about the x-axis gives
[RY ϭ

x

p

R ϭ 2␳gr3
3

Integrating gives

r

r

4r ␲r2 2
ϭ 3␳gr3
3␲ 2

ᕡ Be very careful not to make the mistake of assuming that R passes
through the centroid of the area
over which the pressure acts.

Ans.

which is the volume of the pressure-area ﬁgure.
The resultant R acts through the centroid C of the volume deﬁned by the
ᕡ pressure-area ﬁgure. Calculation of the centroidal distance Y involves the same
integral obtained in Solution I.

SAMPLE PROBLEM 5/23
A buoy in the form of a uniform 8-m pole 0.2 m in diameter has a mass of
200 kg and is secured at its lower end to the bottom of a fresh-water lake with
5 m of cable. If the depth of the water is 10 m, calculate the angle ␪ made by
the pole with the horizontal.

θ

10 m
5m

The free-body diagram of the buoy shows its weight acting through
G, the vertical tension T in the anchor cable, and the buoyancy force B which
passes through centroid C of the submerged portion of the buoy. Let x be the distance from G to the waterline. The density of fresh water is ␳ ϭ 103 kg/m3, so
that the buoyancy force is

Solution.

4m

B ϭ 103(9.81)␲(0.1)2(4 ϩ x) N

[B ϭ ␳gV]

G

Moment equilibrium, ΣMA ϭ 0, about A gives
200(9.81)(4 cos ␪) Ϫ [103(9.81)␲(0.1)2(4 ϩ x)]
Thus,

x ϭ 3.14 m

and

␪ ϭ sinϪ1

4m

4ϩx
cos ␪ ϭ 0
2

΂4 ϩ53.14΃ ϭ 44.5Њ

C

Ans.

A

θ B

T

x
5m
200(9.81) N

x

Article 5/9

PROBLEMS
Introductory Problems
5/185 A beaker of fresh water is in place on the scale
when the 1-lb stainless-steel cylinder is added to
the beaker. What is the normal force which the
cylinder exerts on the bottom of the beaker? By
how much does the scale reading increase as the
cylinder is added? Explain your answer.

Problems

317

5/187 A rectangular block of density ␳1 ﬂoats in a liquid
of density ␳2. Determine the ratio r ϭ h /c, where h
is the submerged depth of block. Evaluate r for an
oak block ﬂoating in fresh water and for steel ﬂoating in mercury.

b
a
ρ1

h

c

ρ2

1 lb

Problem 5/187

Problem 5/185

5/186 The submersible diving chamber has a total mass
of 6.7 Mg including personnel, equipment, and ballast. When the chamber is lowered to a depth of
1.2 km in the ocean, the cable tension is 8 kN. Compute the total volume V displaced by the chamber.

5/188 A 150-kg spherical steel buoy 900 mm in diameter
is to be anchored in salt water 15 m below the surface. Find the mass m of scrap iron to be sealed
inside the buoy in order that the tension in the anchor cable where it attaches to the buoy will not
exceed 1.5 kN. For negligible change in water density, does the buoyancy depend on the depth of
submergence?

T
15 m
900 mm

Problem 5/188

Problem 5/186

318

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces

5/189 Calculate the depth h of mud for which the 3-m
concrete retaining wall is on the verge of tipping
about its forward edge A. The density of mud may
be taken to be 1760 kg /m3 and that of concrete to
be 2400 kg /m3.
0.8 m

5/191 A deep-submersible diving chamber designed in
the form of a spherical shell 1500 mm in diameter
is ballasted with lead so that its weight slightly
exceeds its buoyancy. Atmospheric pressure is
maintained within the sphere during an ocean dive
to a depth of 3 km. The thickness of the shell is
25 mm. For this depth calculate the compressive
stress ␴ which acts on a diametral section of the
shell, as indicated in the right-hand view.

3m
h

Mud

σ

A

Problem 5/189

5/190 The forms for a small concrete retaining wall are
shown in section. There is a brace BC for every
1.5 m of wall length. Assuming that the joints at
A, B, and C act as hinged connections, compute the
compression in each brace BC. Wet concrete may
be treated as a liquid with a density of 2400 kg /m3.
Problem 5/191

B

3m

5/192 The uniform 62-kg pole of 150-mm diameter is
hinged at A, and its lower end is immersed in fresh
water. Determine the tension T in the vertical cable
required to maintain C at a depth of 1 m.
A
T
1.5 m

C

A
2m
Problem 5/190

5m

1m
C

Problem 5/192

Article 5/9
5/193 One end of a uniform pole of length L and density ␳Ј
is secured at C to the bottom of a tank of liquid of
density ␳ and depth h. For the conditions ␳Ј Ͻ ␳
and h Ͻ L, ﬁnd the angle ␪ assumed by the pole.

Problems

319

Representative Problems
5/195 The cross section of a fresh-water tank with a
slanted bottom is shown. A rectangular door 1.6 m
by 0.8 m (normal to the plane of the ﬁgure) in the
bottom of the tank is hinged at A and is opened
against the pressure of the water by the cable
under a tension P as shown. Calculate P.
P

θ

L
1.2 m

h

A

1.6 m
C
30°
Problem 5/193

5/194 When the seawater level inside the hemispherical
chamber reaches the 0.6-m level shown in the ﬁgure, the plunger is lifted, allowing a surge of sea
water to enter the vertical pipe. For this ﬂuid level
(a) determine the average pressure ␴ supported by
the seal area of the valve before force is applied to
lift the plunger and (b) determine the force P (in
addition to the force needed to support its weight)
required to lift the plunger. Assume atmospheric
pressure in all airspaces and in the seal area when
contact ceases under the action of P.

Problem 5/195

5/196 The sides of a V-shaped fresh-water trough, shown
in section, are hinged along their common intersection through O and are supported on each side by
vertical struts hinged at each end and spaced every
2 m. Calculate the compression C in each strut.
Neglect the weights of the members.

0.8 m

P

30°

75 mm
Seawater
supply

0.8 m

0.6 m

30°
O

Air vent

Problem 5/196

0.6 m

0.8 m

0.4 m
0.6 m
Problem 5/194

320

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces

5/197 The solid concrete cylinder 6 ft long and 4 ft in
diameter is supported in a half-submerged position
in fresh water by a cable which passes over a ﬁxed
pulley at A. Compute the tension T in the cable.
The cylinder is waterproofed by a plastic coating.
(Consult Table D/1, Appendix D, as needed.)

5/199 A fresh-water channel 10 ft wide (normal to the
plane of the paper) is blocked at its end by a rectangular barrier, shown in section ABD. Supporting struts BC are spaced every 2 ft along the 10-ft
width. Determine the compression C in each strut.
Neglect the weights of the members.
D

T
A

2′
B

2′

2′
A

60°

60°

C

2′
Problem 5/199
6′

Problem 5/197

5/198 A block of wood in the form of a waterproofed 16-in.
cube is ﬂoating in a tank of salt water with a 6-in.
layer of oil ﬂoating on the water. Assume that the
cube ﬂoats in the attitude shown, and calculate the
height h of the block above the surface of the oil.
The speciﬁc weights of oil, salt water, and wood are
56, 64, and 50 lb /ft3, respectively.

5/200 A channel-marker buoy consists of an 8-ft hollow
steel cylinder 12 in. in diameter weighing 180 lb
and anchored to the bottom with a cable as shown.
If h ϭ 2 ft at high tide, calculate the tension T in
the cable. Also ﬁnd the value of h when the cable
goes slack as the tide drops. The speciﬁc weight of
sea water is 64 lb /ft3. Assume the buoy is weighted
at its base so that it remains vertical.
12″

h
h

8′

6″

Oil

16″

Salt water

Problem 5/198
Problem 5/200

Article 5/9
5/201 A homogeneous solid sphere of radius r is resting
on the bottom of a tank containing a liquid of density ␳l, which is greater than the density ␳s of the
sphere. As the tank is ﬁlled, a depth h is reached at
which the sphere begins to ﬂoat. Determine the expression for the density ␳s of the sphere.

r

Problems

321

5/203 The rectangular gate shown in section is 10 ft long
(perpendicular to the paper) and is hinged about
its upper edge B. The gate divides a channel leading to a fresh-water lake on the left and a saltwater tidal basin on the right. Calculate the torque
M on the shaft of the gate at B required to prevent
the gate from opening when the salt-water level
drops to h ϭ 3 ft.

h

M

B

3′

h
12′
Problem 5/201

Fresh
water

5/202 The hinged gate ABC closes an opening of width b
(perpendicular to the paper) in a water channel.
The water has free access to the underside as well
as the right side of the gate. When the water level
rises above a certain value of h, the gate will open.
Determine the critical value of h. Neglect the mass
of the gate.
C

Salt
water

A

Problem 5/203

5/204 The conical surface and circular base of the saltwater buoy are fabricated from thin steel plate
which weighs 10.2 pounds per square foot. Calculate the diameter d of the spherical lead ball suspended from the vertex of the buoy so that the base
will be 12 in. above the surface of the water.
2′

h
12″
A

B

4′

a

Problem 5/202
d

Problem 5/204

322

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces

5/205 Determine the total force R exerted on the triangular window by the fresh water in the tank. The
water level is even with the top of the window. Also
determine the distance H from R to the water
level.

p = p0 cos θ
r

θ

Problem 5/207
3′

5/208 The triangular and rectangular sections are being
considered for the design of a small fresh-water
concrete dam. From the standpoint of resistance
to overturning about C, which section will require
less concrete, and how much less per foot of dam
length? Concrete weighs 150 lb /ft3.

3′

Problem 5/205

5/206 The cast-iron plug seals the drainpipe of an open
fresh-water tank which is ﬁlled to a depth of 20 ft.
Determine the tension T required to remove the
plug from its tapered hole. Atmospheric pressure
exists in the drainpipe and in the seal area as the
plug is being removed. Neglect mechanical friction
between the plug and its supporting surface.

24′
A

C

B

C
a

b

T
Problem 5/208
20′
9″

6″

5/209 The upstream side of an arched dam has the form
of a vertical cylindrical surface of 500-ft radius and
subtends an angle of 60Њ. If the fresh water is 100 ft
deep, determine the total force R exerted by the
water on the dam face.

4.5″
6″
30°
Problem 5/206

5/207 The Quonset hut is subjected to a horizontal wind,
and the pressure p against the circular roof is approximated by p0 cos ␪. The pressure is positive on
the windward side of the hut and is negative on the
leeward side. Determine the total horizontal shear
Q on the foundation per unit length of roof measured normal to the paper.

′
500

100′

Problem 5/209

30°

Article 5/9
5/210 The semicylindrical steel shell with closed ends has
a mass of 26.6 kg. Determine the mass m of the
lead ballast which must be placed in the shell so
that it ﬂoats in fresh water at its half-radius depth
of 150 mm.

Problems

323

5/212 The 3-m plank shown in section has a density of
800 kg /m3 and is hinged about a horizontal axis
through its upper edge O. Calculate the angle ␪
assumed by the plank with the horizontal for the
level of fresh water shown.

600 mm
150 mm

300 mm

O
3m
1m

θ

Problem 5/210

5/211 The small access hole A allows maintenance workers to enter the storage tank at ground level when
it is empty. Two designs, (a) and (b), are shown for
the hole cover. If the tank is full of fresh water,
estimate the average pressure ␴ in the seal area
of design (a) and the average increase ⌬T in the
initial tension in each of the 16 bolts of design (b).
You may take the pressure over the hole area to be
constant, and the pressure in the seal area of design (b) may be assumed to be atmospheric.

0.375
m

(a)

Problem 5/212

5/213 The elements of a new method for constructing
concrete foundation walls for new houses are shown
in the ﬁgure. Once the footing F is in place, polystyrene forms A are erected and a thin concrete
mixture B is poured between the forms. Ties T prevent the forms from separating. After the concrete
cures, the forms are left in place for insulation. As
a design exercise, make a conservative estimate
for the uniform tie spacing d if the tension in each
tie is not to exceed 6.5 kN. The horizontal tie spacing is the same as the vertical spacing. State any
assumptions. The density of wet concrete is
2400 kg/m3.

0.55 m
12 m

A

0.5
m

(b)
0.75 m

3m

d

Problem 5/211
d
T
d/2

A

B

A

F

Problem 5/213

324

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces

5/214 A structure designed for observation of sea life beneath the ice in polar waters consists of the cylindrical viewing chamber connected to the surface
by the cylindrical shaft open at the top for ingress
and egress. Ballast is carried in the rack below the
chamber. To ensure a stable condition for the structure, it is necessary that its legs bear on the ice with
a force that is at least 15 percent of the total buoyancy force of the submerged structure. If the structure less ballast has a mass of 5.7 Mg, calculate the
required mass m of lead ballast. The density of lead
is 11.37 Mg /m3.

Water level
b
c

h1

h2

Ramp

Problem 5/215

Ice
3m

0.9 m

2.4 m
1.8 m

m

᭤ 5/216 The accurate determination of the vertical position
of the center of mass G of a ship is difﬁcult to achieve
by calculation. It is more easily obtained by a simple
inclining experiment on the loaded ship. With reference to the ﬁgure, a known external mass m0 is
placed a distance d from the centerline, and the
angle of list ␪ is measured by means of the deﬂection
of a plumb bob. The displacement of the ship and the
location of the metacenter M are known. Calculate
the metacentric height GM for a 12 000-t ship inclined
by a 27-t mass placed 7.8 m from the centerline if a
6-m plumb line is deﬂected a distance a ϭ 0.2 m.
The mass m0 is at a distance b ϭ 1.8 m above M.
[Note that the metric ton (t) equals 1000 kg and is
the same as the megagram (Mg).]
d

Problem 5/214

5/215 The trapezoidal viewing window in a sea-life aquarium has the dimensions shown. With the aid of
appropriate diagrams and coordinates, describe two
methods by which the resultant force R on the glass
due to water pressure, and the vertical location of R,
could be found if numerical values were supplied.

m0
b

M

θ

G

a

Problem 5/216

Article 5/10

5/10

Chapter Review

In Chapter 5 we have studied various common examples of forces
distributed throughout volumes, over areas, and along lines. In all these
problems we often need to determine the resultant of the distributed
forces and the location of the resultant.

Finding Resultants of Distributed Forces
To ﬁnd the resultant and line of action of a distributed force:
1. Begin by multiplying the intensity of the force by the appropriate
element of volume, area, or length in terms of which the intensity is
expressed. Then sum (integrate) the incremental forces over the region involved to obtain their resultant.
2. To locate the line of action of the resultant, use the principle of moments. Evaluate the sum of the moments, about a convenient axis,
of all of the increments of force. Equate this sum to the moment of
the resultant about the same axis. Then solve for the unknown moment arm of the resultant.

Gravitational Forces
When force is distributed throughout a mass, as in the case of gravitational attraction, the intensity is the force of attraction ␳g per unit of
volume, where ␳ is the density and g is the gravitational acceleration.
For bodies whose density is constant, we saw in Section A that ␳g cancels when the moment principle is applied. This leaves us with a strictly
geometric problem of ﬁnding the centroid of the ﬁgure, which coincides
with the mass center of the physical body whose boundary deﬁnes the
ﬁgure.
1. For ﬂat plates and shells which are homogeneous and have constant
thickness, the problem becomes one of ﬁnding the properties of an
area.
2. For slender rods and wires of uniform density and constant cross
section, the problem becomes one of ﬁnding the properties of a line
segment.

Integration of Differential Relationships
For problems which require the integration of differential relationships, keep in mind the following considerations.
1. Select a coordinate system which provides the simplest description
of the boundaries of the region of integration.
2. Eliminate higher-order differential quantities whenever lowerorder differential quantities will remain.
3. Choose a ﬁrst-order differential element in preference to a secondorder element and a second-order element in preference to a thirdorder element.

Chapter Review

325

326

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces

4. Whenever possible, choose a differential element which avoids discontinuities within the region of integration.

Distributed Forces in Beams, Cables, and Fluids
In Section B we used these guidelines along with the principles of
equilibrium to solve for the effects of distributed forces in beams, cables,
and ﬂuids. Remember that:
1. For beams and cables the force intensity is expressed as force per
unit length.
2. For ﬂuids the force intensity is expressed as force per unit area, or
pressure.
Although beams, cables, and ﬂuids are physically quite different applications, their problem formulations share the common elements cited
above.

Article 5/10

REVIEW PROBLEMS

Review Problems

327

y
2s

5/217 Determine the coordinates of the centroid of the
trapezoidal area shown.

s
θ

y

x

150 mm

120 mm
s

240 mm

x
2s

Problem 5/217
Problem 5/220

5/218 Locate the centroid of the shaded area.
5/221 The cross section of an aluminum casting in the
form of a solid of revolution about the z-axis is
shown. Calculate the mass m of the casting.

y
b

z

x = ky2

80
mm

0

x
0

b

2b

60
mm

Problem 5/218

5/219 The disk of uniform thickness is composed of equal
sectors of the materials shown. Determine the location of the mass center of the disk.

30
mm
Problem 5/221

y

5/222 The cross section shown is for a complete cast-iron
body of revolution about the z-axis. Compute its
mass m.
Copper

z
100 mm

r

x

Aluminum

Steel

100 mm

Problem 5/219

5/220 Determine the x- and y-coordinates of the centroid
of the shaded area. Evaluate your expressions for
␪ ϭ 0 and ␪ ϭ 90Њ.

40 mm
160 mm
Problem 5/222

328

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces

5/223 Determine the volume V and total surface area A of
the complete ring which is shown in section. All
four corner radii of the cross section are 10 mm.

z

z
10 mm

30 mm

40 mm
50 mm

20
mm

O

40
mm

y

Problem 5/223

20 mm

x

5/224 The assembly consists of four rods cut from the
same bar stock. The curved member forms a circular
arc of radius b. Determine the y- and z-coordinates of
the mass center of the assembly.

Problem 5/225

5/226 Determine the mass and the centroid location of
the cast-aluminum body.

z

z

b
30°
30°

30
30

b

60
30

24
b

24

y

30
30
30
x

x

y

Problem 5/224

5/225 Determine the coordinates of the mass center of
the body constructed of steel plate and a steel rod.
The plate thickness is 2 mm. The rod diameter is
4 mm and its length is 50 mm. The origin O is at
the midthickness of the plate, and the rod is
welded to the face of the plate. What is the mass of
the body?

Dimensions in millimeters
Problem 5/226

5/227 Determine the position of the center of mass of the
homogeneous thin conical shell shown.
z

r
h
x
Problem 5/227

Article 5/10
5/228 A cable is suspended from points A and B on the
same horizontal line and supports a total load W
uniformly distributed along the horizontal. Determine the length S of the cable. (Recall that the convergence of the series of Eq. 5/16a requires that the
sag-to-span ratio be less than 1/4.)

Review Problems

329

5/231 The tapered body has a horizontal cross section
which is circular. Determine the height h of its mass
center above the base of the homogeneous body.
R

100′
A

B

H

h

50′
2R
Problem 5/231
W
Problem 5/228

5/229 A solid ﬂoating object is composed of a hemisphere
and a cone of equal radius r made from the same
homogeneous material. If the object ﬂoats with the
center of the hemisphere above the water surface,
ﬁnd the maximum altitude h which the cone may
have before the object will no longer ﬂoat in the
upright position illustrated.

5/232 Shown in the ﬁgure is a body similar to that of
Prob. 5/231, only now the body is a thin shell with
open top and bottom. Determine the height h of its
mass center above the base of the homogeneous
body and compare your result with the printed answer for Prob. 5/231.
R

H

h

h
2R
r
Problem 5/232

Problem 5/229

5/230 Determine the y-coordinate of the centroid of the
volume obtained by revolving the shaded area about
the x-axis through 180Њ.

5/233 The homogeneous body shown is constructed by
beginning with the solid body of Prob. 5/231 and
then removing a cylindrical volume of diameter
just less than R as shown, leaving a thin wall at the
left portion of the body as well as at the very top.
Determine the height h of the mass center above
the base of the body.

y

R

a/2

a

H

h

x
h
2R
Problem 5/230
Problem 5/233

330

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces

5/234 The ﬁgure shows the cross section of a rectangular
gate 4 m high and 6 m long (perpendicular to the
paper) which blocks a fresh-water channel. The
gate has a mass of 8.5 Mg and is hinged about a
horizontal axis through C. Compute the vertical
force P exerted by the foundation on the lower
edge A of the gate. Neglect the mass of the frame to
which the gate is attached.

5/237 The horizontal steel shaft with two diameters is
welded to the ﬁxed block at A. Construct the diagrams of shear and moment in the shaft due to its
weight. Determine the values of the shear force and
bending moment at the discontinuity in diameter.
y

60 mm dia.

3m

48 mm dia.

A

B
C

x

1m

400
mm

3m
A

400
mm

Problem 5/237

Problem 5/234

5/235 Draw the shear and moment diagrams for the
beam, which supports the uniform load of 50 lb per
foot of beam length distributed over its midsection.
Determine the maximum bending moment and its
location.

5/238 The triangular sign is attached to the post embedded in the concrete base at B. Calculate the shear
force V, the bending moment M, and the torsional
moment T in the post at B during a storm where the
wind velocity normal to the sign reaches 100 km /h.
The air pressure (called stagnation pressure) against
the vertical surface corresponding to this velocity
is 1.4 kPa.

50 lb/ft
z

4′

4′

2m

4′

Problem 5/235

5/236 Determine the maximum bending moment Mmax
for the loaded beam and specify the distance x to
the right of end A where Mmax exists.

2m

600 N/m
1m

A
B
2m

1m

B
x

y

Problem 5/236
Problem 5/238

Article 5/10
5/239 A ﬂat plate seals a triangular opening in the vertical wall of a tank of liquid of density ␳. The plate is
hinged about the upper edge O of the triangle. Determine the force P required to hold the gate in a
closed position against the pressure of the liquid.

h

Review Problems

331

*Computer-Oriented Problems
*5/242 The 30Њ cylindrical sector is made of copper and is
attached as shown to the semicylinder made of aluminum. Determine the angle ␪ for the equilibrium
position of the cylinder resting on a horizontal
surface.
Copper

b
O
r

a

Aluminum
30°

θ

P

r

Problem 5/239

5/240 As part of a preliminary design study, the effects of
wind loads on a 900-ft building are investigated.
For the parabolic distribution of wind pressure
shown in the ﬁgure, compute the force and moment
reactions at the base A of the building due to the
wind load. The depth of the building (perpendicular
to the paper) is 200 ft.
x

Problem 5/242

*5/243 Set up the integral expression for the y-coordinate of
the centroid of the uniform slender rod bent into the
shape shown. Then, for the values a = 2 and b = 8,
numerically evaluate your integral expression.

12 lb/ft2

y
a
900′

p=k x

b

y = k|x|3

p
A
x

Problem 5/240

᭤ 5/241 Regard the tall building of Prob. 5/240 as a uniform upright beam. Determine and plot the shear
force and bending moment in the structure as functions of the height x above the ground. Evaluate
your expressions at x ϭ 450 ft.

Problem 5/243

332

Chapter 5

Distributed Forces

* 5/244 Construct the shear and moment diagrams for the
loaded beam of Prob. 5/120, repeated here. Determine the maximum values of the shear and moment and their locations on the beam.

200 m

A

30 m

B

10 m

w
w = w0 – kx 3

Problem 5/246

200 lb/ft
100 lb/ft
x
B

A
20′

*5/247 As a preliminary step in the construction of a
tramway across a scenic river gorge, a 505-m cable
with a mass of 12 kg /m is strung between points A
and B. Determine the horizontal distance x to the
right of point A to the lowest point on the cable
and compute the tensions at points A and B.

Problem 5/244

500 m
A

* 5/245 A homogeneous charge of solid propellant for a
rocket is in the shape of the circular cylinder
formed with a concentric hole of depth x. For the
dimensions shown, plot X, the x-coordinate of
the mass center of the propellant, as a function of
the depth x of the hole from x = 0 to x = 600 mm.
Determine the maximum value of X and show that
it is equal to the corresponding value of x.

600

50 m
B

Problem 5/247

mm

x

180

mm

m

90 m

Problem 5/245

* 5/246 A length of power cable is suspended from the two
towers as shown. The cable has a mass of 20 kg per
meter of cable. If the maximum allowable cable
tension is 75 kN, determine the mass ␳ of ice per
meter which can form on the cable without the
maximum allowable tension being exceeded. If
additional stretch in the cable is neglected, does the
addition of the ice change the cable conﬁguration?

*5/248 The small remotely-controlled robotic vehicle of
Probs. 5/171 and 5/172 is shown again here. The
200-m tether has a slight negative buoyancy in that
a net downward force of 0.025 N per meter of its
length acts on it. Using its onboard variable horizontal and vertical thrusters, the vehicle maintains
the constant 10-m depth as it moves slowly to the
right. If the maximum horizontal thrust is 10 N
and the maximum vertical thrust is 7 N, determine
the maximum permissible value of the distance d
and state which thruster is the limiting one.

A
10 m

Tv
B
Th

d

Problem 5/248

This page intentionally left blank

Large changes in tension can occur when a line is wrapped around a ﬁxed cylinder.
© STOCK4B-RoyaltyFree/Image Source

6

Friction
CHAPTER OUTLINE
6/1 Introduction

6/5 Screws

Section A Frictional Phenomena

6/6 Journal Bearings

6/2 Types of Friction

6/7 Thrust Bearings; Disk Friction

6/3 Dry Friction

6/8 Flexible Belts

Section B Applications of Friction in Machines

6/9 Rolling Resistance

6/4 Wedges

6/10 Chapter Review

6/1

Introduction

In the preceding chapters we have usually assumed that the forces
of action and reaction between contacting surfaces act normal to the
surfaces. This assumption characterizes the interaction between smooth
surfaces and was illustrated in Example 2 of Fig. 3/1. Although this
ideal assumption often involves only a relatively small error, there are
many problems in which we must consider the ability of contacting surfaces to support tangential as well as normal forces. Tangential forces
generated between contacting surfaces are called friction forces and
occur to some degree in the interaction between all real surfaces. Whenever a tendency exists for one contacting surface to slide along another
surface, the friction forces developed are always in a direction to oppose
this tendency.
In some types of machines and processes we want to minimize the
retarding effect of friction forces. Examples are bearings of all types,
power screws, gears, the ﬂow of ﬂuids in pipes, and the propulsion of
aircraft and missiles through the atmosphere. In other situations we
wish to maximize the effects of friction, as in brakes, clutches, belt
drives, and wedges. Wheeled vehicles depend on friction for both starting and stopping, and ordinary walking depends on friction between the
shoe and the ground.

335

336

Chapter 6

Friction

Friction forces are present throughout nature and exist in all machines no matter how accurately constructed or carefully lubricated. A
machine or process in which friction is small enough to be neglected is
said to be ideal. When friction must be taken into account, the machine
or process is termed real. In all cases where there is sliding motion between parts, the friction forces result in a loss of energy which is dissipated in the form of heat. Wear is another effect of friction.

SECTION A FRICTIONAL PHENOMENA
6/2

Types of Friction

In this article we brieﬂy discuss the types of frictional resistance encountered in mechanics. The next article contains a more detailed account of the most common type of friction, dry friction.
(a) Dry Friction. Dry friction occurs when the unlubricated surfaces
of two solids are in contact under a condition of sliding or a tendency to
slide. A friction force tangent to the surfaces of contact occurs both during the interval leading up to impending slippage and while slippage
takes place. The direction of this friction force always opposes the motion or impending motion. This type of friction is also called Coulomb
friction. The principles of dry or Coulomb friction were developed
largely from the experiments of Coulomb in 1781 and from the work of
Morin from 1831 to 1834. Although we do not yet have a comprehensive
theory of dry friction, in Art. 6/3 we describe an analytical model sufﬁcient to handle the vast majority of problems involving dry friction. This
model forms the basis for most of this chapter.
(b) Fluid Friction. Fluid friction occurs when adjacent layers in a
ﬂuid (liquid or gas) are moving at different velocities. This motion
causes frictional forces between ﬂuid elements, and these forces depend
on the relative velocity between layers. When there is no relative velocity, there is no ﬂuid friction. Fluid friction depends not only on the velocity gradients within the ﬂuid but also on the viscosity of the ﬂuid,
which is a measure of its resistance to shearing action between ﬂuid layers. Fluid friction is treated in the study of ﬂuid mechanics and will not
be discussed further in this book.
(c) Internal Friction. Internal friction occurs in all solid materials
which are subjected to cyclical loading. For highly elastic materials the
recovery from deformation occurs with very little loss of energy due to
internal friction. For materials which have low limits of elasticity and
which undergo appreciable plastic deformation during loading, a considerable amount of internal friction may accompany this deformation.
The mechanism of internal friction is associated with the action of shear
deformation, which is discussed in references on materials science. Because this book deals primarily with the external effects of forces, we
will not discuss internal friction further.

Article 6/3

6/3

Dry Friction

The remainder of this chapter describes the effects of dry friction
acting on the exterior surfaces of rigid bodies. We will now explain the
mechanism of dry friction with the aid of a very simple experiment.

Mechanism of Dry Friction
Consider a solid block of mass m resting on a horizontal surface, as
shown in Fig. 6/1a. We assume that the contacting surfaces have some
roughness. The experiment involves the application of a horizontal force
P which continuously increases from zero to a value sufﬁcient to move
the block and give it an appreciable velocity. The free-body diagram of
the block for any value of P is shown in Fig. 6/1b, where the tangential
friction force exerted by the plane on the block is labeled F. This friction
force acting on the body will always be in a direction to oppose motion
or the tendency toward motion of the body. There is also a normal force
N which in this case equals mg, and the total force R exerted by the supporting surface on the block is the resultant of N and F.
A magniﬁed view of the irregularities of the mating surfaces, Fig.
6/1c, helps us to visualize the mechanical action of friction. Support is
necessarily intermittent and exists at the mating humps. The direction
of each of the reactions on the block, R1, R2, R3, etc. depends not only on
the geometric proﬁle of the irregularities but also on the extent of local
deformation at each contact point. The total normal force N is the sum
mg

m

P

P
F

(a)

α
N

R
(b)

Impending
motion

n

Static
friction
(no motion)

Kinetic
friction
(motion)

Fmax = μ s N

F

Fk = μ k N

t

F
R1 R
2

=

P

R3

P

(c)

(d)

Figure 6/1

Dry Friction

337

338

Chapter 6

Friction

of the n-components of the R’s, and the total frictional force F is the
sum of the t-components of the R’s. When the surfaces are in relative
motion, the contacts are more nearly along the tops of the humps, and
the t-components of the R’s are smaller than when the surfaces are at
rest relative to one another. This observation helps to explain the wellknown fact that the force P necessary to maintain motion is generally
less than that required to start the block when the irregularities are
more nearly in mesh.
If we perform the experiment and record the friction force F as a
function of P, we obtain the relation shown in Fig. 6/1d. When P is
zero, equilibrium requires that there be no friction force. As P is increased, the friction force must be equal and opposite to P as long as
the block does not slip. During this period the block is in equilibrium,
and all forces acting on the block must satisfy the equilibrium equations. Finally, we reach a value of P which causes the block to slip and
to move in the direction of the applied force. At this same time the
friction force decreases slightly and abruptly. It then remains essentially constant for a time but then decreases still more as the velocity
increases.

Static Friction
The region in Fig. 6/1d up to the point of slippage or impending motion is called the range of static friction, and in this range the value of
the friction force is determined by the equations of equilibrium. This
friction force may have any value from zero up to and including the
maximum value. For a given pair of mating surfaces the experiment
shows that this maximum value of static friction Fmax is proportional to
the normal force N. Thus, we may write
Fmax ϭ ␮s N

(6/1)

where ␮s is the proportionality constant, called the coefﬁcient of static
friction.
Be aware that Eq. 6/1 describes only the limiting or maximum value
of the static friction force and not any lesser value. Thus, the equation
applies only to cases where motion is impending with the friction force
at its peak value. For a condition of static equilibrium when motion is
not impending, the static friction force is
F Ͻ ␮s N

Kinetic Friction
After slippage occurs, a condition of kinetic friction accompanies the
ensuing motion. Kinetic friction force is usually somewhat less than the
maximum static friction force. The kinetic friction force Fk is also proportional to the normal force. Thus,
F k ϭ ␮k N

(6/2)

Article 6/3

Dry Friction

339

Friction Angles
The direction of the resultant R in Fig. 6/1b measured from the
direction of N is specified by tan ␣ ϭ F/N. When the friction force
reaches its limiting static value Fmax, the angle ␣ reaches a maximum
value ␾s. Thus,
tan ␾s ϭ ␮s
When slippage is occurring, the angle ␣ has a value ␾k corresponding to
the kinetic friction force. In like manner,
tan ␾k ϭ ␮k
In practice we often see the expression tan ␾ ϭ ␮, in which the
coefficient of friction may refer to either the static or the kinetic case,

© Blackout Concepts/Stockphotopro, Inc

where ␮k is the coefﬁcient of kinetic friction. It follows that ␮k is generally less than ␮s. As the velocity of the block increases, the kinetic friction decreases somewhat, and at high velocities, this decrease may be
signiﬁcant. Coefﬁcients of friction depend greatly on the exact condition
of the surfaces, as well as on the relative velocity, and are subject to considerable uncertainty.
Because of the variability of the conditions governing the action of
friction, in engineering practice it is frequently difﬁcult to distinguish
between a static and a kinetic coefﬁcient, especially in the region of
transition between impending motion and motion. Well-greased screw
threads under mild loads, for example, often exhibit comparable frictional resistance whether they are on the verge of turning or whether
they are in motion.
In the engineering literature we frequently ﬁnd expressions for maximum static friction and for kinetic friction written simply as F ϭ ␮N. It
is understood from the problem at hand whether maximum static friction or kinetic friction is described. Although we will frequently distinguish between the static and kinetic coefficients, in other cases no
distinction will be made, and the friction coefficient will be written
simply as ␮. In those cases you must decide which of the friction conditions, maximum static friction for impending motion or kinetic friction, is involved. We emphasize again that many problems involve a
static friction force which is less than the maximum value at impending motion, and therefore under these conditions the friction relation
Eq. 6/1 cannot be used.
Figure 6/1c shows that rough surfaces are more likely to have
larger angles between the reactions and the n-direction than are
smoother surfaces. Thus, for a pair of mating surfaces, a friction coefficient reflects the roughness, which is a geometric property of the
surfaces. With this geometric model of friction, we describe mating
surfaces as “smooth” when the friction forces they can support are
negligibly small. It is meaningless to speak of a coefficient of friction
for a single surface.

This tree surgeon depends on the
friction between the rope and the
mechanical devices through which
the rope can slip.

340

Chapter 6

Friction

R

Cone of
static friction
Cone of
kinetic friction

2φ k
2φ s

Figure 6/2
depending on the particular problem. The angle ␾s is called the angle of
static friction, and the angle ␾k is called the angle of kinetic friction. The
friction angle for each case clearly deﬁnes the limiting direction of the
total reaction R between two contacting surfaces. If motion is impending, R must be one element of a right-circular cone of vertex angle 2␾s,
as shown in Fig. 6/2. If motion is not impending, R is within the cone.
This cone of vertex angle 2␾s is called the cone of static friction and represents the locus of possible directions for the reaction R at impending
motion. If motion occurs, the angle of kinetic friction applies, and the
reaction must lie on the surface of a slightly different cone of vertex
angle 2␾k. This cone is the cone of kinetic friction.

Factors Affecting Friction
Further experiment shows that the friction force is essentially independent of the apparent or projected area of contact. The true contact area is much smaller than the projected value, since only the peaks
of the contacting surface irregularities support the load. Even relatively small normal loads result in high stresses at these contact points.
As the normal force increases, the true contact area also increases as
the material undergoes yielding, crushing, or tearing at the points of
contact.
A comprehensive theory of dry friction must go beyond the mechanical explanation presented here. For example, there is evidence that
molecular attraction may be an important cause of friction under conditions where the mating surfaces are in very close contact. Other factors
which inﬂuence dry friction are the generation of high local temperatures and adhesion at contact points, relative hardness of mating surfaces, and the presence of thin surface ﬁlms of oxide, oil, dirt, or other
substances.
Some typical values of coefﬁcients of friction are given in Table D/1,
Appendix D. These values are only approximate and are subject to considerable variation, depending on the exact conditions prevailing. They
may be used, however, as typical examples of the magnitudes of frictional effects. To make a reliable calculation involving friction, the
appropriate friction coefﬁcient should be determined by experiments
which duplicate the surface conditions of the application as closely as
possible.

Article 6/3

KEY CONCEPTS
Types of Friction Problems
We can now recognize the following three types of problems encountered in applications involving dry friction. The ﬁrst step in solving a
friction problem is to identify its type.
1. In the ﬁrst type of problem, the condition of impending motion is
known to exist. Here a body which is in equilibrium is on the verge
of slipping, and the friction force equals the limiting static friction
Fmax ϭ ␮s N. The equations of equilibrium will, of course, also hold.
2. In the second type of problem, neither the condition of impending
motion nor the condition of motion is known to exist. To determine
the actual friction conditions, we ﬁrst assume static equilibrium and
then solve for the friction force F necessary for equilibrium. Three
outcomes are possible:
(a) F Ͻ (Fmax ϭ ␮s N): Here the friction force necessary for
equilibrium can be supported, and therefore the body is in
static equilibrium as assumed. We emphasize that the actual
friction force F is less than the limiting value Fmax given by
Eq. 6/1 and that F is determined solely by the equations of
equilibrium.
(b) F ϭ (Fmax ϭ ␮s N): Since the friction force F is at its maximum
value Fmax, motion impends, as discussed in problem type (1).
The assumption of static equilibrium is valid.
(c) F Ͼ (Fmax ϭ ␮s N): Clearly this condition is impossible, because
the surfaces cannot support more force than the maximum ␮s N.
The assumption of equilibrium is therefore invalid, and motion
occurs. The friction force F is equal to ␮k N from Eq. 6/2.
3. In the third type of problem, relative motion is known to exist
between the contacting surfaces, and thus the kinetic coefﬁcient of
friction clearly applies. For this problem type, Eq. 6/2 always gives
the kinetic friction force directly.

The foregoing discussion applies to all dry contacting surfaces and,
to a limited extent, to moving surfaces which are partially lubricated.

Dry Friction

341

342

Chapter 6

Friction

SAMPLE PROBLEM 6/1
Determine the maximum angle ␪ which the adjustable incline may have
with the horizontal before the block of mass m begins to slip. The coefﬁcient of
static friction between the block and the inclined surface is ␮s.

m
μs

θ

The free-body diagram of the block shows its weight W ϭ mg, the
normal force N, and the friction force F exerted by the incline on the block. The
friction force acts in the direction to oppose the slipping which would occur if no
friction were present.
Equilibrium in the x- and y-directions requires
ᕡ

Solution.

[ΣFx ϭ 0]

mg sin ␪ Ϫ F ϭ 0
Ϫmg cos ␪ ϩ N ϭ 0

N ϭ mg cos ␪

␮s ϭ tan ␪max

or

␪max ϭ tanϪ1 ␮s

N

F

θ

Helpful Hints

Dividing the ﬁrst equation by the second gives F/N ϭ tan ␪. Since the maximum
angle occurs when F ϭ Fmax ϭ ␮sN, for impending motion we have

ᕢ

W = mg

x

F ϭ mg sin ␪

[ΣFy ϭ 0]

y

Ans.

ᕡ We choose reference axes along and
normal to the direction of F to
avoid resolving both F and N into
components.

ᕢ This problem describes a very simple
way to determine a static coefﬁcient
of friction. The maximum value of ␪
is known as the angle of repose.

SAMPLE PROBLEM 6/2

100

Determine the range of values which the mass m0 may have so that the 100-kg
block shown in the ﬁgure will neither start moving up the plane nor slip down
the plane. The coefﬁcient of static friction for the contact surfaces is 0.30.

kg

20°

m0

y
981 N

The maximum value of m0 will be given by the requirement for motion impending up the plane. The friction force on the block therefore acts down
the plane, as shown in the free-body diagram of the block for Case I in the ﬁgure.
With the weight mg ϭ 100(9.81) ϭ 981 N, the equations of equilibrium give

Solution.

[ΣFy ϭ 0]
[Fmax ϭ ␮s N]
[ΣFx ϭ 0]

N Ϫ 981 cos 20Њ ϭ 0

Fmax
20°

y
981 N

Fmax ϭ 0.30(922) ϭ 277 N

m0(9.81) ϩ 277 Ϫ 981 sin 20Њ ϭ 0

N
Case I

m0 ϭ 62.4 kg

Ans.

The minimum value of m0 is determined when motion is impending down the
ᕡ plane. The friction force on the block will act up the plane to oppose the tendency to move, as shown in the free-body diagram for Case II. Equilibrium in the
x-direction requires
[ΣFx ϭ 0]

T = m0 g

N ϭ 922 N

m0(9.81) Ϫ 277 Ϫ 981 sin 20Њ ϭ 0

m0 ϭ 6.01 kg

x

Ans.

Thus, m0 may have any value from 6.01 to 62.4 kg, and the block will remain at
rest.
In both cases equilibrium requires that the resultant of Fmax and N be concurrent with the 981-N weight and the tension T.

T = m0 g

Fmax
20°

x

N
Case II

Helpful Hint

ᕡ We see from the results of Sample
Problem 6/1 that the block would
slide down the incline without the restraint of attachment to m0 since tan
20Њ Ͼ 0.30. Thus, a value of m0 will
be required to maintain equilibrium.

Article 6/3

Dry Friction

343

SAMPLE PROBLEM 6/3
Determine the magnitude and direction of the friction force acting on the
100-kg block shown if, ﬁrst, P ϭ 500 N and, second, P ϭ 100 N. The coefﬁcient of
static friction is 0.20, and the coefﬁcient of kinetic friction is 0.17. The forces are
applied with the block initially at rest.

100

P

kg

20°

Solution. There is no way of telling from the statement of the problem whether
the block will remain in equilibrium or whether it will begin to slip following the
application of P. It is therefore necessary that we make an assumption, so we will
take the friction force to be up the plane, as shown by the solid arrow. From the
free-body diagram a balance of forces in both x- and y-directions gives
[ΣFx ϭ 0]
[ΣFy ϭ 0]

y
100(9.81) = 981 N
x
P

P cos 20Њ ϩ F Ϫ 981 sin 20Њ ϭ 0

F

N Ϫ P sin 20Њ Ϫ 981 cos 20Њ ϭ 0

20°

F
N

P ϭ 500 N
Substitution into the ﬁrst of the two equations gives

Case I.

F ϭ Ϫ134.3 N
The negative sign tells us that if the block is in equilibrium, the friction force
acting on it is in the direction opposite to that assumed and therefore is down
the plane, as represented by the dashed arrow. We cannot reach a conclusion on
the magnitude of F, however, until we verify that the surfaces are capable of
supporting 134.3 N of friction force. This may be done by substituting P ϭ 500 N
into the second equation, which gives
N ϭ 1093 N
The maximum static friction force which the surfaces can support is then
[Fmax ϭ ␮s N ]

Fmax ϭ 0.20(1093) ϭ 219 N

Since this force is greater than that required for equilibrium, we conclude that
the assumption of equilibrium was correct. The answer is, then,
F ϭ 134.3 N down the plane

Ans.

P ϭ 100 N
Substitution into the two equilibrium equations gives

Case II.

F ϭ 242 N

N ϭ 956 N

But the maximum possible static friction force is
[Fmax ϭ ␮s N ]

Helpful Hint

Fmax ϭ 0.20(956) ϭ 191.2 N

ᕡ We should note that even though ΣFx

It follows that 242 N of friction cannot be supported. Therefore, equilibrium cannot

ᕡ exist, and we obtain the correct value of the friction force by using the kinetic coefﬁcient of friction accompanying the motion down the plane. Hence, the answer is
[Fk ϭ ␮k N ]

F ϭ 0.17(956) ϭ 162.5 N up the plane

Ans.

is no longer equal to zero, equilibrium
does exist in the y-direction, so that
ΣFy ϭ 0. Therefore, the normal force
N is 956 N whether or not the block is
in equilibrium.

344

Chapter 6

Friction

SAMPLE PROBLEM 6/4

b

The homogeneous rectangular block of mass m, width b, and height H is
placed on the horizontal surface and subjected to a horizontal force P which
moves the block along the surface with a constant velocity. The coefﬁcient of kinetic friction between the block and the surface is ␮k. Determine (a) the greatest
value which h may have so that the block will slide without tipping over and
(b) the location of a point C on the bottom face of the block through which the
resultant of the friction and normal forces acts if h ϭ H/2.

P
H

m
h

y

Solution. (a) With the block on the verge of tipping, we see that the entire reaction between the plane and the block will necessarily be at A. The free-body
diagram of the block shows this condition. Since slipping occurs, the friction
force is the limiting value ␮k N, and the angle ␪ becomes ␪ ϭ tanϪ1 ␮k. The resultant of Fk and N passes through a point B through which P must also pass, since
ᕡ three coplanar forces in equilibrium are concurrent. Hence, from the geometry
of the block
tan ␪ ϭ ␮k ϭ

b/2
h

hϭ

b
2␮k

B

θ
Fk

x

b
—
2
N

If h were greater than this value, moment equilibrium about A would not be
satisﬁed, and the block would tip over.
Alternatively, we may ﬁnd h by combining the equilibrium requirements for
the x- and y-directions with the moment-equilibrium equation about A. Thus,

G

[ΣFy ϭ 0]

N Ϫ mg ϭ 0

θ

[ΣFx ϭ 0]

Fk Ϫ P ϭ 0

[ΣMA ϭ 0]

Ph Ϫ mg

N ϭ mg
P ϭ Fk ϭ ␮k N ϭ ␮kmg

b
ϭ0
2

mgb
mgb
b
hϭ
ϭ
ϭ
2␮kmg 2␮k
2P

Fk

Ans.

x
ϭ tan ␪ ϭ ␮k
H/2

so

x ϭ ␮k H/2

P
mg

C

H
—
2

x

θ
N

(b) With h ϭ H/2 we see from the free-body diagram for case (b) that the resultant of Fk and N passes through a point C which is a distance x to the left of
the vertical centerline through G. The angle ␪ is still ␪ ϭ ␾ ϭ tanϪ1 ␮k as long as
the block is slipping. Thus, from the geometry of the ﬁgure we have

ᕢ

h
mg

A

θ

Ans.

P

G

Ans.

If we were to replace ␮k by the static coefﬁcient ␮s, then our solutions would
describe the conditions under which the block is (a) on the verge of tipping and
(b) on the verge of slipping, both from a rest position.

Helpful Hints

ᕡ Recall that the equilibrium equations apply to a body moving with a
constant velocity (zero acceleration)
just as well as to a body at rest.

ᕢ Alternatively, we could equate the
moments about G to zero, which
would give us F(H/2) Ϫ Nx ϭ 0. Thus,
with Fk ϭ ␮k N we get x ϭ ␮x H/2.

Article 6/3

Dry Friction

345

SAMPLE PROBLEM 6/5
The three ﬂat blocks are positioned on the 30Њ incline as shown, and a force
P parallel to the incline is applied to the middle block. The upper block is prevented from moving by a wire which attaches it to the ﬁxed support. The coefﬁcient of static friction for each of the three pairs of mating surfaces is shown.
Determine the maximum value which P may have before any slipping takes
place.

30
=0

μs

The free-body diagram of each block is drawn. The friction forces
are assigned in the directions to oppose the relative motion which would occur if
ᕡ no friction were present. There are two possible conditions for impending motion. Either the 50-kg block slips and the 40-kg block remains in place, or the 50and 40-kg blocks move together with slipping occurring between the 40-kg block
and the incline.
The normal forces, which are in the y-direction, may be determined without
reference to the friction forces, which are all in the x-direction. Thus,
[ΣFy ϭ 0]

(30-kg)

N1 Ϫ 30(9.81) cos 30Њ ϭ 0
N2 Ϫ 50(9.81) cos 30Њ Ϫ 255 ϭ 0
N3 Ϫ 40(9.81) cos 30Њ Ϫ 680 ϭ 0

F1

y
50(9.81) N
N1
F1

F2 ϭ 0.40(680) ϭ 272 N

P

P Ϫ 76.5 Ϫ 272 ϩ 50(9.81) sin 30Њ ϭ 0

x

272 ϩ 40(9.81) sin 30Њ Ϫ F3 ϭ 0

y
N2

F3 ϭ 468 N

F2 ϩ 40(9.81) sin 30Њ Ϫ 459 ϭ 0

Equilibrium of the 50-kg block gives, ﬁnally,
[ΣFx ϭ 0]

F3

N3

Helpful Hints

ᕡ In the absence of friction the middle
block, under the inﬂuence of P,
would have a greater movement
than the 40-kg block, and the friction force F2 will be in the direction
to oppose this motion as shown.

ᕢ We see now that F2 is less than
␮s N2 ϭ 272 N.

P ϩ 50(9.81) sin 30Њ Ϫ 263 Ϫ 76.5 ϭ 0
P ϭ 93.8 N

40(9.81) N

F2

x

F2 ϭ 263 N

N2

F2

P ϭ 103.1 N

But the maximum possible value of F3 is F3 ϭ ␮s N3 ϭ 0.45(1019) ϭ 459 N. Thus,
468 N cannot be supported and our initial assumption was wrong. We conclude,
therefore, that slipping occurs ﬁrst between the 40-kg block and the incline.
With the corrected value F3 ϭ 459 N, equilibrium of the 40-kg block for its impending motion requires

ᕢ [ΣFx ϭ 0]

N1

N3 ϭ 1019 N

F1 ϭ 0.30(255) ϭ 76.5 N

T

30°

We now check on the validity of our initial assumption. For the 40-kg block
with F2 ϭ 272 N the friction force F3 would be given by
[ΣFx ϭ 0]

30(9.81) N

x

The assumed equilibrium of forces at impending motion for the 50-kg block
gives
[ΣFx ϭ 0]

=0

30°

We will assume arbitrarily that only the 50-kg block slips, so that the 40-kg
block remains in place. Thus, for impending slippage at both surfaces of the
50-kg block, we have
[Fmax ϭ ␮s N]

.45

μs

=0

N2 ϭ 680 N

(40-kg)

kg

y

N1 ϭ 255 N

(50-kg)

40
.40

P

Solution.

kg

50

.30

μs

kg

Ans.

Thus, with P ϭ 93.8 N, motion impends for the 50-kg and 40-kg blocks as a unit.

346

Chapter 6

Friction

PROBLEMS
Introductory Problems
6/1 The 85-lb force P is applied to the 200-lb crate,
which is stationary before the force is applied. Determine the magnitude and direction of the friction
force F exerted by the horizontal surface on the
crate.

6/4 The coefficients of static and kinetic friction between the 100-kg block and the inclined plane are
0.30 and 0.20, respectively. Determine (a) the friction force F acting on the block when P is applied
with a magnitude of 200 N to the block at rest,
(b) the force P required to initiate motion up the incline from rest, and (c) the friction force F acting on
the block if P = 600 N.
P

200 lb
P = 85 lb

100 kg

μ s = 0.50
μ k = 0.40

20°

μ s = 0.30
μ k = 0.20

Problem 6/1

15°

6/2 The 700-N force is applied to the 100-kg block,
which is stationary before the force is applied. Determine the magnitude and direction of the friction
force F exerted by the horizontal surface on the
block.
P = 700 N

Problem 6/4

6/5 The magnitude of force P is slowly increased. Does
the homogeneous box of mass m slip or tip first?
State the value of P which would cause each occurrence. Neglect any effect of the size of the small
feet.

100 kg

P
30°

μ s = 0.80
μ k = 0.60

A

Problem 6/2

6/3 The designer of a ski resort wishes to have a portion
of a beginner’s slope on which the skier’s speed will
remain fairly constant. Tests indicate the average
coefﬁcients of friction between skis and snow to be
␮s ϭ 0.10 and ␮k ϭ 0.08. What should be the slope
angle ␪ of the constant-speed section?

θ

Problem 6/3

d

30°

m
B

μ s = 0.50

C
2d
Problem 6/5

Article 6/3

Problems

6/6 Determine the magnitude and direction of the friction force which the vertical wall exerts on the 100-lb
block if (a) ␪ ϭ 15Њ and (b) ␪ ϭ 30Њ.

347

F

20°
100 lb

θ

F
P = 120 lb

μs = 0.50
μ k = 0.40

Problem 6/6

6/7 Determine the minimum coefﬁcient of static friction
␮s which will allow the drum with ﬁxed inner hub to
be rolled up the 15Њ incline at a steady speed without
slipping. What are the corresponding values of the
force P and the friction force F ?

Problem 6/8

6/9 The light bar is used to support the 50-kg block in
its vertical guides. If the coefficient of static friction is 0.30 at the upper end of the bar and 0.40 at
the lower end of the bar, find the friction force acting at each end for x = 75 mm. Also find the maximum value of x for which the bar will not slip.

P

50 kg

30°
m
300 mm

B

r
r/2

μs

A
x
Problem 6/9

15°
Problem 6/7

6/8 The tongs are designed to handle hot steel tubes
which are being heat-treated in an oil bath. For a
20Њ jaw opening, what is the minimum coefficient
of static friction between the jaws and the tube
which will enable the tongs to grip the tube without slipping?

6/10 The semicircular 5-kg plate rotates about a ﬁxed
bearing at O that can exert a maximum frictional
moment of 1.2 N ⅐ m on the plate. The horizontal
force P is applied to a cord wrapped around the plate
periphery and pinned at A. (a) With P = 0, determine the maximum angle ␪ for which equilibrium
is possible. (b) From the position determined in
(a) calculate the force P required to rotate the body
counterclockwise.

O
A

θ

0.2 m
P
Problem 6/10

348

Chapter 6

Friction

6/11 The homogeneous body with two small feet and two
ideal wheels is at rest on the rough incline. (a) Assume no slippage and determine the maximum value
of the angle ␪ for which the body does not overturn
about feet A. (b) If ␮s ϭ 0.40, determine the maximum value of the angle ␪ for which the body does
not slip. (c) If ␮s ϭ 0.40 and side C of the body now
faces up the incline, determine the maximum value
of the angle ␪ for which the body does not slip.

θ

100 lb
3′′

24′′
8′′

h/4
h/4
25 lb
h/2

Problem 6/13

C

6/14 The illustration shows the design of a cam-type
locking device, which, in the presence of sufﬁcient
friction, limits the movement of body B to be to the
left only; rightward movement is prevented. The
surface of the cam near point D is circular with center at C. Given the distance L, specify the cam offset
d so that the device will work if the coefﬁcient of
static friction ␮s is 0.20 or greater.

G
h/2
B
ms

A
q

d
Problem 6/11

C

6/12 The strut AB of negligible mass is hinged to the horizontal surface at A and to the uniform 25-kg wheel
at B. Determine the minimum couple M applied to the
wheel which will cause it to slip if the coefﬁcient of static friction between the wheel and the surface is 0.40.

O

L

A

Allowable
motion

No
motion
B

D

B

m
0m
25

15
0

m
m

Problem 6/14

M

6/15 The uniform slender bar has an ideal roller at its
upper end A. If the coefﬁcient of static friction at B
is ␮s ϭ 0.25, determine the minimum angle ␪ for
which equilibrium is possible. Repeat for ␮s ϭ 0.50.

A
A
Problem 6/12

Representative Problems
6/13 The 100-lb wheel rolls on its hub up the circular incline under the action of the 25-lb weight attached
to a cord around the rim. Determine the angle ␪ at
which the wheel comes to rest, assuming that friction is sufﬁcient to prevent slippage. What is the
minimum coefﬁcient of friction which will permit
this position to be reached with no slipping?

θ

B

ms = 0.25, 0.50

Problem 6/15

Article 6/3
6/16 The upper end of the bar of Prob. 6/15 is now leaned
against a nonvertical wall. Determine the minimum
value of the angle ␪ for which equilibrium is possible
for ␮s ϭ 0.25 and for ␮s ϭ 0.50.

Problems

349

a

b

A
O

θ

Problem 6/18

105° θ

B

ms = 0.25, 0.50

Problem 6/16

6/17 A person (mass m1) who is kneeling on a plywood
panel (mass m2) wishes to push himself and the
panel away from the right-hand wall. Determine
a condition on ␮2 which would allow him to do this,
as opposed to his slipping relative to a stationary
panel. The two applicable coefﬁcients of static friction are ␮1 and ␮2. Evaluate ␮2 for m1 = 80 kg,
m2 = 10 kg, and ␮1 ϭ 0.60.

6/19 A loaded wheelbarrow is placed on a rough incline.
The combined weight of the wheelbarrow and its load
acts at the center of gravity G. (a) Determine the
maximum angle ␪ for which the wheelbarrow will
not slip. (b) Repeat if the wheelbarrow faces uphill.
Neglect all friction associated with the front wheel B.

G

ms = 0.80
q

20″

A
21″

B
8″

Problem 6/19

6/20 The force P is applied to (a) the 60-lb block and
(b) the 100-lb block. For each case, determine the
magnitude of P required to initiate motion.

m1

μ s = 0.40
μ s = 0.12

μ1
μ2

100 lb

P (a)
P (b)

Problem 6/20

m2

Problem 6/17

60 lb

6/21 Calculate the magnitude of the clockwise couple M
required to turn the 50-kg cylinder in the supporting
block shown. The coefﬁcient of kinetic friction is 0.30.

6/18 The homogeneous rectangular block of mass m rests
on the inclined plane which is hinged about a horizontal axis through O. If the coefﬁcient of static friction between the block and the plane is ␮, specify
the conditions which determine whether the block
tips before it slips or slips before it tips as the angle
␪ is gradually increased.

900 mm
M

60°

30°

Problem 6/21

350

Chapter 6

Friction

6/22 The inverted track T with freely ﬂoating cylinder C
comprise a system which is designed to hold paper
or other thin materials P in place. The coefﬁcient of
static friction is ␮ for all interfaces. What minimum
value of ␮ ensures that the device will work no matter how heavy the supported material P is?

6/24 A clockwise couple M is applied to the circular cylinder as shown. Determine the value of M required
to initiate motion for the conditions mB ϭ 3 kg,
mC ϭ 6 kg, (␮s)B ϭ 0.50, (␮s)C ϭ 0.40, and r = 0.2 m.
Friction between the cylinder C and the block B is
negligible.
mC

30°

(μs)C

r

mB
M

(μs)B

C
Problem 6/24

T

6/25 Determine the range of weights W for which the
100-lb block is in equilibrium. All wheels and pulleys have negligible friction.
P
Problem 6/22

6/23 The sliding glass door rolls on the two small lower
wheels A and B. Under normal conditions the upper
wheels do not touch their horizontal guide. (a) Compute the force P required to slide the door at a
steady speed if wheel A becomes “frozen” and does
not turn in its bearing. (b) Rework the problem if
wheel B becomes frozen instead of wheel A. The coefﬁcient of kinetic friction between a frozen wheel
and the supporting surface is 0.30, and the center of
mass of the 140-lb door is at its geometric center.
Neglect the small diameter of the wheels.

40′′

μ s = 0.30
μ k = 0.25

100

lb

20°
W

10°
Problem 6/25

6/26 A 100-kg roofer crouches on an 18-kg sheet of
plywood as he is about to effect a shingle repair.
Determine the friction force which the roof surface
exerts on the plywood if the coefﬁcients of static
friction are (a) (␮s)1 ϭ 0.60 and (␮s)2 ϭ 0.50 and
(b) (␮s)1 ϭ 0.50 and (␮s)2 ϭ 0.40. In all cases, the coefﬁcient of kinetic friction is 75% of the static value.

P
m1
40′′

A
6′′

(μs)1, (μk)1

B
28′′

6′′

(μs)2, (μk)2

m2

Problem 6/23
5
12

Problem 6/26

Article 6/3
6/27 Determine the distance s to which the 90-kg painter
can climb without causing the 4-m ladder to slip at
its lower end A. The top of the 15-kg ladder has a
small roller, and at the ground the coefﬁcient of static friction is 0.25. The mass center of the painter is
directly above her feet.

Problems

351

P
200 m
m
150 m
m

P
B

h
210 mm
4m
Problem 6/31
s

6/32 The ﬁgure shows the design in section of a loaded
bracket which is supported on the ﬁxed shaft by the
roller at B and by friction at the corner A. The coefﬁcient of static friction is 0.40. Neglect the weight of
the bracket and show that the bracket as designed
will remain in place. Find the friction force F.

A
1.5 m
Problem 6/27

6/28 The 1600-kg car is just beginning to negotiate the
16Њ ramp. If the car has rear-wheel drive, determine
the minimum coefﬁcient of static friction required
at B.
1475 mm

20"
4"

400 lb

A

1070
mm

6"

185 mm
B

G

315 mm

16°
B

A
Problem 6/28

6/29 Repeat Prob. 6/28, but now the car has front-wheel
drive.
6/30 Repeat Prob. 6/28, but now the car has all-wheel
drive. Assume that slipping occurs at A and B
simultaneously.
6/31 The rectangular steel yoke is used to prevent slippage between the two boards under tensile loads
P. If the coefﬁcients of static friction between the
yoke and the board surfaces and between the boards
are all 0.30, determine the maximum value of h for
which there is no slipping. For P = 800 N, determine the corresponding normal force N between the
two boards if motion impends at all surfaces.

Problem 6/32

6/33 The homogeneous square body is positioned as
shown. If the coefﬁcient of static friction at B is 0.40,
determine the critical value of the angle ␪ below
which slipping will occur. Neglect friction at A.
s

A
60°

s
θ

B

Problem 6/33

352

Chapter 6

Friction

6/34 Determine the range of weights W of the uniform
slender bar for which the system will be in equilibrium. Neglect friction at all bearings.
W

L/3
30°
A

100 lb
ms = 0.40

2L/3

6/37 The 10-kg solid cylinder is resting in the inclined
V-block. If the coefﬁcient of static friction between
the cylinder and the block is 0.50, determine (a) the
friction force F acting on the cylinder at each side
before force P is applied and (b) the value of P
required to start sliding the cylinder up the incline.

30°

30°

45

°

O

45

°

En

Problem 6/34

dV

6/35 The uniform rod with center of mass at G is supported by the pegs A and B, which are ﬁxed in the
wheel. If the coefﬁcient of friction between the rod
and pegs is ␮, determine the angle ␪ through which
the wheel may be slowly turned about its horizontal
axis through O, starting from the position shown,
before the rod begins to slip. Neglect the diameter of
the rod compared with the other dimensions.

iew

P
30°
Horiz.
Problem 6/37

θ

A

b

a
a

6/38 The three identical rollers are stacked on a horizontal surface as shown. If the coefﬁcient of static
friction ␮s is the same for all pairs of contacting surfaces, ﬁnd the minimum value of ␮s for which the
rollers will not slip.

B

G

Problem 6/35

6/36 The solid semicylinder of mass m and radius r is
rolled through an angle ␪ by the horizontal force P.
If the coefﬁcient of static friction is ␮s, determine
the angle ␪ at which the cylinder begins to slip on
the horizontal surface as P is gradually increased.
What value of ␮s would permit ␪ to reach 90Њ?
Problem 6/38
θ

r

Problem 6/36

P

Article 6/3
6/39 The movable left-hand jaw of the bar clamp can be
slid along the frame to increase the capacity of
the clamp. To prevent slipping of the jaw on the
frame when the clamp is under load, the dimension
x must exceed a certain minimum value. For given
values of a and b and a static friction coefﬁcient ␮s,
specify this design minimum value of x to prevent
slipping of the jaw.

Problems

353

R
A
2R
B

Problem 6/41

6/42 A uniform block of mass m is at rest on an incline ␪.
Determine the maximum force P which can be applied to the block in the direction shown before
slipping begins. The coefﬁcient of static friction
between the block and the incline is ␮s. Also determine the angle ␤ between the horizontal direction of
P and the direction of initial movement of the block.

x

b
a
Problem 6/39

6/40 The uniform slender bar of length l is placed in the
opening of width d at the 30Њ angle shown. For what
range of l/d will the bar remain in static equilibrium? The coefﬁcient of static friction at A and B is
␮s ϭ 0.40.

P
θ

l

Problem 6/42
30°
B

A

6/43 The single-lever block brake prevents rotation of
the ﬂywheel under a counterclockwise torque M.
Find the force P required to prevent rotation if the
coefﬁcient of static friction is ␮s. Explain what would
happen if the geometry permitted b to equal ␮se.

d

P

Problem 6/40

6/41 Determine the maximum value of the angle ␪ for
which the uniform slender rod will remain in equilibrium. The coefﬁcient of static friction at A is
␮A ϭ 0.80, and friction associated with the small
roller at B may be neglected.

M
l
b

e

Problem 6/43

r

354

Chapter 6

Friction

6/44 Determine the minimum value of ␪ for which equilibrium is possible if (a) (␮s)A ϭ 0.60 and (␮s)B ϭ 0.20
and (b) (␮s)A ϭ 0.40 and (␮s)B ϭ 0.10.
(ms)B
B

q

(ms)A
A

12°

50°

15°

O
Problem 6/44
g

6/45 The industrial truck is used to move the solid 1200kg roll of paper up the 30Њ incline. If the coefﬁcients
of static and kinetic friction between the roll and the
vertical barrier of the truck and between the roll
and the incline are both 0.40, compute the required
tractive force P between the tires of the truck and
the horizontal surface.

30°

0k

90

Problem 6/46

6/47 Two workers are carrying a 2-in.-thick panel by
means of panel carriers, one of which is shown in
the detail ﬁgures. The vertical panel is steadied by
equal horizontal forces applied by the left hands of
the workers. Determine the minimum coefﬁcient of
static friction between the panel and the carriers for
which there will be no slippage. The carrier grips at
A, B, and C do not rotate on the carrier frame. Note
that each worker must apply both a vertical and a
horizontal force to the carrier handle. Assume that
each worker supports half the weight of the panel.

Problem 6/45

6/46 Heavy-duty plate clamps with wedging cams are
designed to be used in pairs to lift and transport
large steel plates. As each cam begins to take effect,
the plate slips down slightly against the vertical surface of the clamp and, therefore, generates limiting
static friction at that interface. If the coefﬁcient
of static friction for all contacting surfaces is 0.30,
calculate the force R supported by the pin at O for
each of the two clamps symmetrically placed on the
900-kg plate.

C

30°
B
30″

A

2″

Problem 6/47

3.5″

Article 6/3
6/48 The uniform slender rod is slowly lowered from the
upright position (␪ ϭ 90Њ) by means of the cord attached to its upper end and passing under the small
ﬁxed pulley. If the rod is observed to slip at its lower
end when ␪ ϭ 40Њ, determine the coefﬁcient of static
friction at the horizontal surface.

l
T

1′′
F

l
Problem 6/48

O

1′′
1–
4

6/49 A woman pedals her bicycle up a 5-percent grade on
a slippery road at a steady speed. The woman and
bicycle have a combined mass of 82 kg with mass center at G. If the rear wheel is on the verge of slipping,
determine the coefﬁcient of friction ␮s between the
rear tire and the road. If the coefﬁcient of friction
were doubled, what would be the friction force F
acting on the rear wheel? (Why may we neglect friction under the front wheel?)

A

G
700
mm

460
mm
1080 mm

Problem 6/49

C
1
–′′
2

1′′

1–

0.840′′

8

B

F

F

Problem 6/50

5

355

6/50 The pipe-clamp ends are designed to ﬁt a standard
1
2 -in. steel water pipe (outside diameter = 0.840 in.).
The right-hand ﬁtting slides loosely along the pipe
when the lever C is held up to release its contact
with the pipe, as can be seen from the expanded
view. Under a clamping load F, the right-hand ﬁtting contacts the pipe at A and B only, as its loose ﬁt
allows it to rotate slightly clockwise on the pipe.
Determine (a) the minimum coefﬁcients of static
friction ␮s between the contacting surfaces at A and
B so that the end ﬁtting will not slip under load and
(b) the force R supported by the pin at O under a
clamping force F = 800 lb. The spring force under
the lever projection is negligible.

θ

100

Problems

C

356

Chapter 6

Friction

6/51 A block of mass m0 is placed between the vertical wall
and the upper end A of the uniform slender bar of
mass m. If the coefficient of static friction is ␮s
between the block and the wall and also between the
block and the bar, determine a general expression for
the minimum value ␪min of the angle ␪ for which the
block will remain in equilibrium. Evaluate your expression for the conditions ␮s ϭ 0.50 and
m
(a) m ϭ 0.1,
0

6/52 The double-block brake shown is applied to the
ﬂywheel by means of the action of the spring. To
release the brake, a force P is applied to the control
rod. In the operating position with P = 0, the
spring is compressed 30 mm. Select a spring with
an appropriate constant (stiffness) k which will
provide sufﬁcient force to brake the ﬂywheel under
the torque M = 100 N ⅐ m if the applicable coefﬁcient
of friction for both brake shoes is 0.20. Neglect the
dimensions of the shoes.

m
(b) m ϭ 1, and
0

300 mm

m
(c) m ϭ 10.
0
For each case, state the minimum coefﬁcient of static friction (␮s)B necessary to prevent slippage at B.

80 mm
D

C

250 mm

μs

400 mm

A

m0

P
250 mm

M

θ

A

m

B

Problem 6/52

(μs)B

Problem 6/51

B

Article 6/4

SECTION B

Wedges

357

APPLICATIONS OF FRICTION IN MACHINES

In Section B we investigate the action of friction in various machine
applications. Because the conditions in these applications are normally
either limiting static or kinetic friction, we will use the variable ␮
(rather than ␮s or ␮k) in general. Depending on whether motion is impending or actually occurring, ␮ can be interpreted as either the static
or kinetic coefﬁcient of friction.

6/4

Wedges

A wedge is one of the simplest and most useful machines. A wedge is
used to produce small adjustments in the position of a body or to apply
large forces. Wedges largely depend on friction to function. When sliding
of a wedge is impending, the resultant force on each sliding surface of
the wedge will be inclined from the normal to the surface by an amount
equal to the friction angle. The component of the resultant along the
surface is the friction force, which is always in the direction to oppose
the motion of the wedge relative to the mating surfaces.
Figure 6/3a shows a wedge used to position or lift a large mass m,
where the vertical loading is mg. The coefﬁcient of friction for each pair
of surfaces is ␮ ϭ tan ␾. The force P required to start the wedge is found
from the equilibrium triangles of the forces on the load and on the
wedge. The free-body diagrams are shown in Fig. 6/3b, where the reactions are inclined at an angle ␾ from their respective normals and are in
the direction to oppose the motion. We neglect the mass of the wedge.
From the free-body diagrams we write the force equilibrium conditions
by equating to zero the sum of the force vectors acting on each body.
The solutions of these equations are shown in part c of the ﬁgure, where
R2 is found ﬁrst in the upper diagram using the known value of mg. The
force P is then found from the lower triangle once the value of R2 has
been established.
If P is removed and the wedge remains in place, equilibrium of the
wedge requires that the equal reactions R1 and R2 be collinear as R
3
shown in Fig. 6/4, where the wedge angle ␣ is taken to be less than ␾.
Part a of the ﬁgure represents impending slippage at the upper surface,
and part c of the ﬁgure represents impending slippage at the lower surface. In order for the wedge to slide out of its space, slippage must occur
at both surfaces simultaneously; otherwise, the wedge is self-locking,
and there is a ﬁnite range of possible intermediate angular positions of
R1 and R2 for which the wedge will remain in place. Figure 6/4b illustrates this range and shows that simultaneous slippage is not possible
if ␣ Ͻ 2␾. You are encouraged to construct additional diagrams for
the case where ␣ Ͼ ␾ and verify that the wedge is self-locking as long
as ␣ Ͻ 2␾.
If the wedge is self-locking and is to be withdrawn, a pull P on the
wedge will be required. To oppose the new impending motion, the reactions R1 and R2 must act on the opposite sides of their normals from
those when the wedge was inserted. The solution can be obtained as

m

α

P
(a)

R3
mg
R2

mg

φ +α

φ φ

R2

R2

R1

α
R1

P

φ
φ +α

φ
P
(b)

Forces to raise load

Figure 6/3

(c)

R2

358

Chapter 6

Friction

y

y

Range of R2

α

2φ – α

φ
R2

α

φ –α

R2

φ

φ –α

α

x

α

φ –α

φ –α

φ

φ

φ R1

2φ – α

R1

Range of R1
(a) Slipping impending
at upper surface

(b) Range of R1 = R2
for no slip

(c) Slipping impending
at lower surface

Figure 6/4

with the case of raising the load. The free-body diagrams and vector
polygons for this condition are shown in Fig. 6/5.
Wedge problems lend themselves to graphical solutions as indicated
in the three ﬁgures. The accuracy of a graphical solution is easily held
within tolerances consistent with the uncertainty of friction coefﬁcients.
Algebraic solutions may also be obtained from the trigonometry of the
equilibrium polygons.

R3
mg

mg
R3

R2

φ –α
R2

φ
R2

φ

α

φ –α
R2

P
R1

φ

φ R1

P

Forces to lower load

Figure 6/5

6/5

Screws

Screws are used for fastening and for transmitting power or motion.
In each case the friction developed in the threads largely determines the
action of the screw. For transmitting power or motion the square thread
is more efﬁcient than the V-thread, and the analysis here is conﬁned to
the square thread.

Article 6/5

Force Analysis
Consider the square-threaded jack, Fig. 6/6, under the action of the
axial load W and a moment M applied about the axis of the screw. The
screw has a lead L (advancement per revolution) and a mean radius r.
The force R exerted by the thread of the jack frame on a small representative portion of the screw thread is shown on the free-body diagram of
the screw. Similar reactions exist on all segments of the screw thread
where contact occurs with the thread of the base.
If M is just sufﬁcient to turn the screw, the thread of the screw
will slide around and up on the ﬁxed thread of the frame. The angle ␾
made by R with the normal to the thread is the angle of friction, so that
tan ␾ ϭ ␮. The moment of R about the vertical axis of the screw is
Rr sin (␣ ϩ ␾), and the total moment due to all reactions on the threads
is ΣRr sin (␣ ϩ ␾). Since r sin (␣ ϩ ␾) appears in each term, we may factor it out. The moment equilibrium equation for the screw becomes
M ϭ [r sin (␣ ϩ ␾)] ΣR
Equilibrium of forces in the axial direction further requires that
W ϭ ΣR cos (␣ ϩ ␾) ϭ [cos (␣ ϩ ␾)] ΣR
Combining the expressions for M and W gives
M ϭ Wr tan (␣ ϩ ␾)

(6/3)

To determine the helix angle ␣, unwrap the thread of the screw for one
complete turn and note that ␣ ϭ tanϪ1 (L/2␲r).
We may use the unwrapped thread of the screw as an alternative
model to simulate the action of the entire screw, as shown in Fig.
6/7a. The equivalent force required to push the movable thread up the
fixed incline is P ϭ M/r, and the triangle of force vectors gives Eq. 6/3
immediately.

W

W

M
M

L

α

r

α

Figure 6/6

R

φ

Screws

359

360

Chapter 6

Friction

W
M
P = ––
r

W
L
tan α = –––
2π r

α
α

φ R

L

α

M
P = ––
r

α

R

φ

2π r

(b) To lower load (α < φ)

(a) To raise load
W
M
P = ––
r

α

φ

α

R
(c) To lower load (α > φ)

Figure 6/7
Conditions for Unwinding
If the moment M is removed, the friction force changes direction so
that ␾ is measured to the other side of the normal to the thread. The
screw will remain in place and be self-locking provided that ␣ Ͻ ␾, and
will be on the verge of unwinding if ␣ ϭ ␾.
To lower the load by unwinding the screw, we must reverse the direction of M as long as ␣ Ͻ ␾. This condition is illustrated in Fig. 6/7b
for our simulated thread on the ﬁxed incline. An equivalent force P ϭ
M/r must be applied to the thread to pull it down the incline. From the
triangle of vectors we therefore obtain the moment required to lower
the screw, which is
M ϭ Wr tan (␾ Ϫ ␣)

(6/3a)

If ␣ Ͼ ␾, the screw will unwind by itself, and Fig. 6/7c shows that the
moment required to prevent unwinding is
M ϭ Wr tan (␣ Ϫ ␾)

(6/3b)

Article 6/5

SAMPLE PROBLEM 6/6

361

P

The horizontal position of the 500-kg rectangular block of concrete is adjusted by the 5Њ wedge under the action of the force P. If the coefﬁcient of static
friction for both wedge surfaces is 0.30 and if the coefﬁcient of static friction
between the block and the horizontal surface is 0.60, determine the least force P
required to move the block.

The free-body diagrams of the wedge and the block are drawn with
the reactions R1, R2, and R3 inclined with respect to their normals by the
ᕡ amount of the friction angles for impending motion. The friction angle for limiting static friction is given by ␾ ϭ tanϪ1 ␮. Each of the two friction angles is computed and shown on the diagram.
We start our vector diagram expressing the equilibrium of the block at a
convenient point A and draw the only known vector, the weight W of the block.
Next we add R3, whose 31.0Њ inclination from the vertical is now known. The
vector ϪR2, whose 16.70Њ inclination from the horizontal is also known, must
close the polygon for equilibrium. Thus, point B on the lower polygon is determined by the intersection of the known directions of R3 and ϪR2, and their magnitudes become known.
For the wedge we draw R2, which is now known, and add R1, whose direction is known. The directions of R1 and P intersect at C, thus giving us the solution for the magnitude of P.

5°

Solution.

500 kg

P
b
5°

φ1

R1

B

a

a

φ2 =
0.60
= 31.0°
tan–1

16.70° + 5° = 21.7°

The simplest choice of reference axes for calculation
purposes is, for the block, in the direction a-a normal to R3 and, for the wedge, in
ᕢ the direction b-b normal to R1. The angle between R2 and the a-direction is
16.70Њ ϩ 31.0Њ ϭ 47.7Њ. Thus, for the block

W = 500(9.81) N

–R2
φ1
φ1
R2

b
φ 1 = tan–1 0.30
= 16.70°

Algebraic solution.

[ΣFa ϭ 0]

Screws

R1

φ2

C
Wedge P
16.70°

–R2

R2

16.70°

A

Block
R3

500(9.81) sin 31.0Њ Ϫ R2 cos 47.7Њ ϭ 0

31.0° W = 4905 N

R2 ϭ 3750 N
For the wedge the angle between R2 and the b-direction is 90Њ Ϫ (2␾1 ϩ
5Њ) ϭ 51.6Њ, and the angle between P and the b-direction is ␾1 ϩ 5Њ ϭ 21.7Њ. Thus,
[ΣFb ϭ 0]

3750 cos 51.6Њ Ϫ P cos 21.7Њ ϭ 0
P ϭ 2500 N

Helpful Hints
Ans.

The accuracy of a graphical solution is well within the
uncertainty of the friction coefﬁcients and provides a simple and direct result. By
laying off the vectors to a reasonable scale following the sequence described, we
obtain the magnitudes of P and the R’s easily by scaling them directly from the
diagrams.

Graphical solution.

R3

ᕡ Be certain to note that the reactions
are inclined from their normals in
the direction to oppose the motion.
Also, we note the equal and opposite
reactions R2 and ϪR2.

ᕢ It should be evident that we avoid simultaneous equations by eliminating reference to R3 for the block and
R1 for the wedge.

362

Chapter 6

Friction

SAMPLE PROBLEM 6/7
The single-threaded screw of the vise has a mean diameter of 1 in. and has 5
square threads per inch. The coefﬁcient of static friction in the threads is 0.20. A
60-lb pull applied normal to the handle at A produces a clamping force of 1000 lb
between the jaws of the vise. (a) Determine the frictional moment MB, developed
at B, due to the thrust of the screw against the body of the jaw. (b) Determine
the force Q applied normal to the handle at A required to loosen the vise.

6′′

B

8′′
10′′
A

Solution. From the free-body diagram of the jaw we ﬁrst obtain the tension T
in the screw.
[ΣMC ϭ 0]

1000(16) Ϫ 10T ϭ 0

C
1000 lb

T ϭ 1600 lb

T

The helix angle ␣ and the friction angle ␾ for the thread are given by

ᕡ

␣ ϭ tanϪ1

1/5
L
ϭ tanϪ1
ϭ 3.64Њ
2␲r
2␲(0.5)

C

␾ ϭ tanϪ1 ␮ ϭ tanϪ1 0.20 ϭ 11.31Њ
where the mean radius of the thread is r ϭ 0.5 in.

φ

R

The isolated screw is simulated by the free-body diagram
shown where all of the forces acting on the threads of the screw are represented
by a single force R inclined at the friction angle ␾ from the normal to the thread.
The moment applied about the screw axis is 60(8) ϭ 480 lb-in. in the clockwise
direction as seen from the front of the vise. The frictional moment MB due to the
friction forces acting on the collar at B is in the counterclockwise direction to oppose the impending motion. From Eq. 6/3 with T substituted for W the net moment acting on the screw is

α

(a) To tighten.

T 60(8) = 480 lb-in.

MB

(a) To tighten

α φ
R

T

MB

M′

(b) To loosen

M ϭ Tr tan (␣ ϩ ␾)
480 Ϫ MB ϭ 1600(0.5) tan (3.64Њ ϩ 11.31Њ)
MB ϭ 266 lb-in.

Ans.

(b) To loosen. The free-body diagram of the screw on the verge of being loosened is shown with R acting at the friction angle from the normal in the direcᕢ tion to counteract the impending motion. Also shown is the frictional moment
MB ϭ 266 lb-in. acting in the clockwise direction to oppose the motion. The angle
between R and the screw axis is now ␾ Ϫ ␣, and we use Eq. 6/3a with the net
moment equal to the applied moment MЈ minus MB. Thus
M ϭ Tr tan (␾ Ϫ ␣)
MЈ Ϫ 266 ϭ 1600(0.5) tan (11.31Њ Ϫ 3.64Њ)
MЈ ϭ 374 lb-in.
Thus, the force on the handle required to loosen the vise is
Q ϭ MЈ/d ϭ 374/8 ϭ 46.8 lb

Ans.

Helpful Hints

ᕡ Be careful to calculate the helix
angle correctly. Its tangent is the
lead L (advancement per revolution)
divided by the mean circumference
2␲r and not by the diameter 2r.

ᕢ Note that R swings to the opposite
side of the normal as the impending
motion reverses direction.

Article 6/5

PROBLEMS
(Unless otherwise instructed, neglect the weights of the
wedges and screws in the problems which follow.)

Introductory Problems
6/53 The 10Њ wedge is driven under the spring-loaded
wheel whose supporting strut C is ﬁxed. Determine
the minimum coefﬁcient of static friction ␮s for
which the wedge will remain in place. Neglect all
friction associated with the wheel.

Problems

363

6/55 The device shown is used for coarse adjustment of the
height of an experimental apparatus without a change
in its horizontal position. Because of the slipjoint at A,
turning the screw does not rotate the cylindrical leg
above A. The mean diameter of the thread is 3 in. and
8
the coefﬁcient of friction is 0.15. For a conservative
design which neglects friction at the slipjoint, what
should be the minimum number N of threads per inch
to ensure that the single-threaded screw does not turn
by itself under the weight of the apparatus?
P

C
A

10°

μs

Problem 6/53

6/54 In wood-frame construction, two shims are frequently used to ﬁll the gap between the framing S
and the thinner window/door jamb D. The members
S and D are shown in cross section in the ﬁgure. For
the 3Њ shims shown, determine the minimum necessary coefﬁcient of static friction necessary so that
the shims will remain in place.
3°

S

Problem 6/55

6/56 The 10Њ doorstop is inserted with a rightward horizontal force of 30 lb. If the coefﬁcient of static
friction for all surfaces is ␮s ϭ 0.20, determine the
values NU and NL of the normal forces on the upper
and lower faces of the doorstop. With the given
information, can you determine the force P required
to extract the doorstop?

Door

D

30 lb
10∞
10°

3°
Problem 6/54

Problem 6/56

364

Chapter 6

Friction

6/57 The elements of a deodorant dispenser are shown in
the ﬁgure. To advance the deodorant D, the knob C
is turned. The threaded shaft engages the threads
in the movable deodorant base A; the shaft has no
threads at the ﬁxed support B. The 6-mm-diameter
double square thread has a lead of 5 mm. Determine
the coefﬁcient of static friction ␮s for which the deodorant will not retract under the action of the force P.
Neglect friction at B.

6/59 Determine the force P required to force the 10Њ
wedge under the 90-kg uniform crate which rests
against the small stop at A. The coefﬁcient of friction for all surfaces is 0.40.
1.2 m

5°

0.7 m

90 kg

A

10°
10°

P

P

Problem 6/59
D

Representative Problems
A

6/60 The two 5Њ wedges shown are used to adjust the position of the column under a vertical load of 5 kN.
Determine the magnitude of the forces P required
to raise the column if the coefﬁcient of friction for
all surfaces is 0.40.

B

5 kN
C

Problem 6/57

6/58 A 1600-kg rear-wheel-drive car is being driven up
the ramp at a slow steady speed. Determine the
minimum coefﬁcient of static friction ␮s for which
the portable ramp will not slip forward. Also determine the required friction force FA at each rear
drive wheel.
2545 mm

5°

P

6/61 If the loaded column of Prob. 6/60 is to be lowered,
calculate the horizontal forces PЈ required to withdraw the wedges.
150 mm

G
μs

A

5°

Problem 6/60

1070
mm

500 mm

315 mm

P

380 mm
500 mm
Problem 6/58

B

Article 6/5
6/62 Determine the torque M which must be applied to
the handle of the screw to begin moving the 100-lb
block up the 15Њ incline. The coefﬁcient of static
friction between the block and the incline is 0.50,
and the single-thread screw has square threads with
a mean diameter of 1 in. and advances 0.4 in. for
each complete turn. The coefﬁcient of static friction
for the threads is also 0.50. Neglect friction at the
small ball joint A.

A

365

P

27 kg

5°
20°

Problem 6/64

15°

100 lb

Problems

6/65 Repeat Prob. 6/64, only now the 27-kg concrete
block begins to move down the 20Њ incline as shown.
All other conditions remain as in Prob. 6/64.

M

P

Problem 6/62

6/63 A compressive force of 600 N is to be applied to the
two boards in the grip of the C-clamp. The threaded
screw has a mean diameter of 10 mm and advances
2.5 mm per turn. The coefﬁcient of static friction is
0.20. Determine the force F which must be applied
normal to the handle at C in order to (a) tighten and
(b) loosen the clamp. Neglect friction at point A.

5°
27 kg

20°

Problem 6/65
A

B

100 mm

C
Problem 6/63

6/66 The coefﬁcient of static friction ␮s between the 100-lb
body and the 15Њ wedge is 0.20. Determine the magnitude of the force P required to begin raising the
100-lb body if (a) rollers of negligible friction are
present under the wedge, as illustrated, and (b) the
rollers are removed and the coefﬁcient of static friction ␮s ϭ 0.20 applies at this surface as well.

6/64 The coefﬁcient of static friction for both wedge surfaces is 0.40 and that between the 27-kg concrete
block and the 20Њ incline is 0.70. Determine the
minimum value of the force P required to begin
moving the block up the incline. Neglect the weight
of the wedge.

100 lb

P
15°

Problem 6/66

366

Chapter 6

Friction

6/67 For both conditions (a) and (b) as stated in Prob.
6/66, determine the magnitude and direction of the
force PЈ required to begin lowering the 100-lb body.
6/68 Calculate the horizontal force P on the light 10Њ
wedge necessary to initiate movement of the 40-kg
cylinder. The coefﬁcient of static friction for both
pairs of contacting surfaces is 0.25. Also determine
the friction force FB at point B. (Caution: Check
carefully your assumption of where slipping occurs.)

6/70 The vertical position of the 100-kg block is adjusted
by the screw-activated wedge. Calculate the moment
M which must be applied to the handle of the screw
to raise the block. The single-thread screw has square
threads with a mean diameter of 30 mm and advances 10 mm for each complete turn. The coefﬁcient
of friction for the screw threads is 0.25, and the coefﬁcient of friction for all mating surfaces of the block
and wedge is 0.40. Neglect friction at the ball joint A.

100 kg
A
10°

A

B
P

10°

Problem 6/70

Problem 6/68

6/69 The collar A has a force ﬁt on shaft B and is to be removed from the shaft by the wheel-puller mechanism
shown. The screw has a single square thread with a
mean diameter of 20 mm and a lead L of 6 mm. If a
torque of 24 N ⅐ m is required to turn wheel C to slip
the collar off the shaft, determine the average pressure p (compressive stress) between the collar and
the shaft. The coefﬁcient of friction for the screw at E
is 0.25, and that for the shaft and collar is 0.30. Friction at the ball end D of the shaft is negligible.
C

E

6/71 Calculate the moment MЈ which must be applied to
the handle of the screw of Prob. 6/70 to withdraw
the wedge and lower the 100-kg load.
6/72 The threaded collar is used to connect two shafts,
both with right-hand threads on their ends. The
shafts are under a tension T = 8 kN. If the threads
have a mean diameter of 16 mm and a lead of 4 mm,
calculate the torque M required to turn the collar in
either direction with the shafts prevented from
turning. The coefﬁcient of friction is 0.24.

T

T

M
Problem 6/72
D
50 mm

60 mm

A

B
Problem 6/69

Article 6/5
6/73 The jack shown is designed to lift small unit-body
cars. The screw is threaded into the collar pivoted at
B, and the shaft turns in a ball thrust bearing at A.
The thread has a mean diameter of 10 mm and a
lead (advancement per revolution) of 2 mm. The
coefﬁcient of friction for the threads is 0.20. Determine the force P normal to the handle at D required
(a) to raise a mass of 500 kg from the position
shown and (b) to lower the load from the same position. Neglect friction in the pivot and bearing at A.

P
B

80
m
m
0

10

45°
45°

C

150 mm

m

m

D

Problem 6/73

367

᭤6/74 The 2Њ tapered pin is forced into a mating tapered
hole in the ﬁxed block with a force P = 400 N. If the
force required to remove the pin (with P = 0) is PЈ =
300 N, determine the coefﬁcient of friction between
the pin and the surface of the hole. (Hint: The pressure (stress) normal to the tapered pin surface remains unchanged until the pin actually moves. The
distributed forces over the surface of the pin may be
replaced by an equivalent single resultant force.)
2°

A

Problems

P′
Problem 6/74

368

Chapter 6

Friction

6/6

Journal Bearings

A journal bearing is one which gives lateral support to a shaft in
contrast to axial or thrust support. For dry bearings and for many
partially lubricated bearings we may apply the principles of dry friction. These principles provide a satisfactory approximation for design
purposes.
A dry or partially lubricated journal bearing with contact or near
contact between the shaft and the bearing is shown in Fig. 6/8, where
the clearance between the shaft and bearing is greatly exaggerated to
clarify the action. As the shaft begins to turn in the direction shown, it
will roll up the inner surface of the bearing until it slips. Here it will remain in a more or less ﬁxed position during rotation. The torque M required to maintain rotation and the radial load L on the shaft will cause

L

Shaft
O

rƒ

Bearing

M

r
A
F
R

N

Figure 6/8
a reaction R at the contact point A. For vertical equilibrium R must
equal L but will not be collinear with it. Thus, R will be tangent to a
small circle of radius rƒ called the friction circle. The angle between R
and its normal component N is the friction angle ␾. Equating the sum of
the moments about A to zero gives
M ϭ Lrƒ ϭ Lr sin ␾

(6/4)

For a small coefficient of friction, the angle ␾ is small, and the
sine and tangent may be interchanged with only small error. Since ␮ ϭ
tan ␾, a good approximation to the torque is
M ϭ ␮Lr

(6/4a)

This relation gives the amount of torque or moment which must be applied to the shaft to overcome friction for a dry or partially lubricated
journal bearing.

Article 6/7

6/7

Thrust Bearings; Disk Friction

Friction between circular surfaces under distributed normal pressure occurs in pivot bearings, clutch plates, and disk brakes. To examine
these applications, we consider the two ﬂat circular disks shown in Fig.
6/9. Their shafts are mounted in bearings (not shown) so that they can
be brought into contact under the axial force P. The maximum torque
which this clutch can transmit is equal to the torque M required to slip
one disk against the other. If p is the normal pressure at any location
between the plates, the frictional force acting on an elemental area is
␮p dA, where ␮ is the friction coefﬁcient and dA is the area r dr d␪ of
the element. The moment of this elemental friction force about the shaft
axis is ␮pr dA, and the total moment becomes
Mϭ

͵ ␮pr dA

where we evaluate the integral over the area of the disk. To carry out
this integration, we must know the variation of ␮ and p with r.
dθ
M

dr

μ p dA

r R
P

P
M

Figure 6/9
In the following examples we will assume that ␮ is constant. Furthermore, if the surfaces are new, ﬂat, and well supported, it is reasonable to assume that the pressure p is uniform over the entire surface so
that ␲R2p ϭ P. Substituting the constant value of p in the expression
for M gives
Mϭ

␮P
␲R2

͵ ͵
2␲

0

R

0

r 2 dr d␪ ϭ 2 ␮PR
3

(6/5)

We may interpret this result as equivalent to the moment due to a friction force ␮P acting at a distance 2R from the shaft center.
3
If the friction disks are rings, as in the collar bearing shown in Fig.
6/10, the limits of integration are the inside and outside radii Ri and Ro,
respectively, and the frictional torque becomes
M ϭ 2 ␮P
3

Ro3 Ϫ Ri3
Ro2 Ϫ Ri2

(6/5a)

After the initial wearing-in period is over, the surfaces retain their
new relative shape and further wear is therefore constant over the surface. This wear depends on both the circumferential distance traveled

Thrust Bearings; Disk Friction

369

370

Chapter 6

Friction

M
P

2Ri

2Ro

Figure 6/10

© Courtesy of General Motors/Zuma Press

and the pressure p. Since the distance traveled is proportional to r, the
expression rp ϭ K may be written, where K is a constant. The value of K
is determined from the equilibrium condition for the axial forces, which
gives

A typical automotive disk brake

͵ p dA ϭ K ͵ ͵
2␲

Pϭ

0

R

0

dr d␪ ϭ 2␲KR

With pr ϭ K ϭ P/(2␲R), we may write the expression for M as
␮P
͵ ␮pr dA ϭ 2␲R ͵ ͵
2␲

Mϭ

0

R

r dr d␪

0

which becomes
1

M ϭ 2 ␮PR

(6/6)
3

The frictional moment for worn-in plates is, therefore, only (1)/(2), or 4
2 3
as much as for new surfaces. If the friction disks are rings of inside radius Ri and outside radius Ro, substitution of these limits gives for the
frictional torque for worn-in surfaces
M ϭ 1 ␮P(Ro ϩ Ri)
2

(6/6a)

You should be prepared to deal with other disk-friction problems
where the pressure p is some other function of r.

Article 6/7

SAMPLE PROBLEM 6/8

Thrust Bearings; Disk Friction

371

T

The bell crank ﬁts over a 100-mm-diameter shaft which is ﬁxed and cannot
rotate. The horizontal force T is applied to maintain equilibrium of the crank
under the action of the vertical force P ϭ 100 N. Determine the maximum and
minimum values which T may have without causing the crank to rotate in either
direction. The coefﬁcient of static friction ␮ between the shaft and the bearing
surface of the crank is 0.20.

Impending rotation occurs when the reaction R of the ﬁxed shaft on
the bell crank makes an angle ␾ ϭ tanϪ1 ␮ with the normal to the bearing surface and is, therefore, tangent to the friction circle. Also, equilibrium requires
that the three forces acting on the crank be concurrent at point C. These facts
are shown in the free-body diagrams for the two cases of impending motion.
The following calculations are needed:

120 mm

mm
100
O

Solution.

180 mm
P = 100 N
C

T1

Friction angle ␾ ϭ tanϪ1 ␮ ϭ tanϪ1 0.20 ϭ 11.31Њ
Radius of friction circle rƒ ϭ r sin ␾ ϭ 50 sin 11.31Њ ϭ 9.81 mm
Angle ␪ ϭ tanϪ1
Angle ␤ ϭ sinϪ1

R1

120
ϭ 33.7Њ
180
rƒ
OC

ϭ sinϪ1

r

rƒ

9.81
Ί(120)2 ϩ (180)2

O
P = 100 N

ϭ 2.60Њ

R1

P

–
T1
(a) Counterclockwise motion impends

(a) Impending counterclockwise motion. The equilibrium triangle of forces
is drawn and gives

C

T2

T1 ϭ P cot (␪ Ϫ ␤) ϭ 100 cot (33.7Њ Ϫ 2.60Њ)
T1 ϭ Tmax ϭ 165.8 N

Ans.
r
O

(b) Impending clockwise motion. The equilibrium triangle of forces for this
case gives

R2
P = 100 N

T2 ϭ P cot (␪ ϩ ␤) ϭ 100 cot (33.7Њ ϩ 2.60Њ)
T2 ϭ Tmin ϭ 136.2 N

rƒ

R2

Ans.

P

+
T2
(b) Clockwise motion impends

372

Chapter 6

Friction

PROBLEMS
Introductory Problems
6/75 A torque M of 1510 N ⅐ m must be applied to the
50-mm-diameter shaft of the hoisting drum to raise
the 500-kg load at constant speed. The drum and
shaft together have a mass of 100 kg. Calculate the
coefﬁcient of friction ␮ for the bearing.

6/77 Circular disk A is placed on top of disk B and is subjected to a compressive force of 80 lb. The diameters
of A and B are 9 in. and 12 in., respectively, and the
pressure under each disk is constant over its surface. If the coefﬁcient of friction between A and B is
0.40, determine the couple M which will cause A to
slip on B. Also, what is the minimum coefﬁcient of
friction ␮ between B and the supporting surface C
which will prevent B from rotating?

300
mm

80 lb
50
mm
M
M

A
B
500 kg
C
Problem 6/75

6/76 The two ﬂywheels are mounted on a common shaft
which is supported by a journal bearing between
them. Each ﬂywheel has a mass of 40 kg, and the
diameter of the shaft is 40 mm. If a 3-N ⅐ m couple M
on the shaft is required to maintain rotation of the
ﬂywheels and shaft at a constant low speed, compute (a) the coefﬁcient of friction in the bearing and
(b) the radius rƒ of the friction circle.

Problem 6/77

6/78 Determine the tension T in the cable to raise the
800-kg load if the coefﬁcient of friction for the 30-mm
bearing is 0.25. Also ﬁnd the tension T0 in the stationary section of the cable. The mass of the cable
and pulley is small and may be neglected.

T
M

Problem 6/76

300
mm

T0

30
mm

800
kg

Problem 6/78

Article 6/7
6/79 Calculate the tension T required to lower the 800-kg
load described in Prob. 6/78. Also ﬁnd T0.
6/80 The 20-kg steel ring A with inside and outside radii
of 50 mm and 60 mm, respectively, rests on a ﬁxed
horizontal shaft of 40-mm radius. If a downward
force P = 150 N applied to the periphery of the ring
is just sufﬁcient to cause the ring to slip, calculate
the coefﬁcient of friction ␮ and the angle ␪.
θ

40
mm

B

6/83 The axial section of the two mating circular disks
is shown. Derive the expression for the torque M required to turn the upper disk on the ﬁxed lower one
if the pressure p between the disks follows the relation p ϭ k/r2, where k is a constant to be determined. The coefﬁcient of friction ␮ is constant over
the entire surface.
L

60 mm

M

A
P

Rotating
Problem 6/80

Representative Problems

Fixed

6/81 The weight of the drum D and its cable is 100 lb,
and the coefﬁcient of friction ␮ for the bearing is
0.20. Determine the force P required to raise the
80-lb cylinder if the bearing friction is (a) neglected
and (b) included in the analysis. The weight of the
shaft is negligible.
P

D
′′
16

10′′
2′′

80 lb
Problem 6/81

373

6/82 Determine the force P required to lower the 80-lb
cylinder of Prob. 6/81. Compare your answer with
the stated results of that problem. Is the no-friction
value of P equal to the average of the forces required to raise and lower the cylinder?

50
mm

G

Problems

ri

Problem 6/83

ro

374

Chapter 6

Friction

6/84 The two pulleys are fastened together and are used to
hoist the cylinder of mass m. The fraction k can vary
from near zero to one. Derive an expression for the
tension T required to raise the cylinder at
a steady speed if the coefﬁcient of friction for the
bearing of radius r0 is ␮, a small enough value to permit the substitution of ␮ for sin ␾, where ␾ is the
friction angle. The mass of the pulley unit is m0.
Evaluate your expression for T if m = 50 kg,
m0 ϭ 30 kg, r ϭ 0.3 m, k ϭ 1, r0 ϭ 25 mm, and
2
␮ ϭ 0.15.

6/87 The telephone-cable reel has a mass of 250 kg and is
mounted on an 80-mm-diameter shaft. If the coefﬁcient of friction between the shaft and its bearing is
0.30, calculate the horizontal tension T required to
turn the reel.

T
500 mm
80 mm

r

kr

Problem 6/87

T

m
Problem 6/84

6/85 Repeat Prob. 6/84 for the case of lowering the cylinder of mass m at a steady speed.
6/86 An end of the thin board is being sanded by the disk
sander under application of the force P. If the effective coefﬁcient of kinetic friction is ␮ and if the pressure is essentially constant over the board end,
determine the moment M which must be applied by
the motor in order to rotate the disk at a constant
angular speed. The board end is centered along the
radius of the disk.

6/88 The front wheels of an experimental rear-drive vehicle have a radius of 300 mm and are designed
with disk-type brakes consisting of a ring A with
outside and inside radii of 150 mm and 75 mm, respectively. The ring, which does not turn with the
wheel, is forced against the wheel disk with a force P.
If the pressure between the ring and the wheel disk
is uniform over the mating surfaces, compute the
friction force F between each front tire and the horizontal road for an axial force P = 1 kN when the
vehicle is powered at constant speed with the
wheels turning. The coefﬁcient of friction between
the disk and ring is 0.35.

A

150 mm
R

75 mm
P

300 mm

P
R/4
R/2
R/4

Problem 6/86

Problem 6/88

P

Article 6/7
6/89 An automobile disk brake consists of a ﬂat-faced
rotor and a caliper which contains a disk pad on
each side of the rotor. For equal forces P behind the
two pads with the pressure p uniform over the pad,
show that the moment applied to the hub is independent of the angular span ␤ of the pads. Would
pressure variation with ␪ change the moment?

Problems

375

6/92 For the ﬂat sanding disk of radius a, the pressure p
developed between the disk and the sanded surface
decreases linearly with r from a value p0 at the center to p0 /2 at r = a. If the coefﬁcient of friction is ␮,
derive the expression for the torque M required to
turn the shaft under an axial force L.
L

β
Ri

Ro

M

θ

a
p0
p

r

Problem 6/89

6/90 The pulley system shown is used to hoist the 200-kg
block. The diameter of the bearing for the upper
pulley is 20 mm, and that for the lower pulley is
12 mm. For a coefﬁcient of friction ␮ ϭ 0.25 for both
bearings, calculate the tensions T, T1, and T2 in the
three cables if the block is being raised slowly.

180 mm

T2

1
– p0
–
2

T1

T

Problem 6/92

6/93 In addition to the radial pressure variation of
Prob. 6/92, assume that the coefﬁcient of friction ␮
decreases linearly with r from a value ␮0 at the
center to ␮0 /2 at r = a. Derive an expression for the
torque M required to turn the shaft under an axial
load L and compare with the stated result for
Prob. 6/92.
6/94 Each of the four wheels of the vehicle weighs 40 lb
and is mounted on a 4-in.-diameter journal (shaft).
The total weight of the vehicle is 960 lb, including
wheels, and is distributed equally on all four wheels.
If a force P = 16 lb is required to keep the vehicle
rolling at a constant low speed on a horizontal surface, calculate the coefﬁcient of friction which exists
in the wheel bearings. (Hint: Draw a complete freebody diagram of one wheel.)
40″

90 mm
4″

P
200 kg

Problem 6/90

6/91 Calculate the tensions T, T1, and T2 for Prob. 6/90 if
the block is being lowered slowly.

Problem 6/94

376

Chapter 6

Friction

6/95 In the ﬁgure is shown a multiple-disk clutch designed for marine use. The driving disks A are
splined to the driving shaft B so that they are free to
slip along the shaft but must rotate with it. The
disks C drive the housing D by means of the bolts E,
along which they are free to slide. In the clutch
shown there are ﬁve pairs of friction surfaces.
Assume the pressure is uniformly distributed over
the area of the disks and determine the maximum
torque M which can be transmitted if the coefﬁcient
of friction is 0.15 and P = 500 N.
D

᭤6/96 The hemispherical thrust bearing on the end of the
shaft supports an axial force P. Derive the expression for the moment M required to rotate the shaft
at constant speed if the pressure p is proportional to
sin ␣ and the coefﬁcient of friction is ␮.
P
M

C

E
A 75 mm
100 mm

25 mm

150 mm

20°
P

r

α
p

B
Problem 6/96

Problem 6/95

Article 6/8

6/8

Flexible Belts

Flexible Belts

377

r

The impending slippage of ﬂexible cables, belts, and ropes over
sheaves and drums is important in the design of belt drives of all types,
band brakes, and hoisting rigs.
Figure 6/11a shows a drum subjected to the two belt tensions T1
and T2, the torque M necessary to prevent rotation, and a bearing reaction R. With M in the direction shown, T2 is greater than T1. The freebody diagram of an element of the belt of length r d␪ is shown in part b
of the ﬁgure. We analyze the forces acting on this differential element
by establishing the equilibrium of the element, in a manner similar to
that used for other variable-force problems. The tension increases from
T at the angle ␪ to T ϩ dT at the angle ␪ ϩ d␪. The normal force is a differential dN, since it acts on a differential element of area. Likewise the
friction force, which must act on the belt in a direction to oppose slipping, is a differential and is ␮ dN for impending motion.
Equilibrium in the t-direction gives

dθ

β

θ

M
R

T2
T1
(a)
n
T + dT
t

T cos

d␪
d␪
ϩ ␮ dN ϭ (T ϩ dT) cos
2
2

dθ
––
2

μ dN
dN r

T
dθ
––
dθ 2

␮ dN ϭ dT

or

since the cosine of a differential quantity is unity in the limit. Equilibrium in the n-direction requires that

(b)

Figure 6/11

d␪
d␪
ϩ T sin
2
2

dN ϭ (T ϩ dT) sin

dN ϭ T d␪

or

where we have used the facts that the sine of a differential angle in the
limit equals the angle and that the product of two differentials must be
neglected in the limit compared with the ﬁrst-order differentials remaining.
Combining the two equilibrium relations gives
dT
ϭ ␮ d␪
T
Integrating between corresponding limits yields
T2

dT
ϭ
T

T1

or

ln

͵

␤

0

␮ d␪

© Media Bakery

͵

T2
ϭ ␮␤
T1

where the ln (T2/T1) is a natural logarithm (base e). Solving for T2 gives
T2 ϭ T1e␮␤

(6/7)

Just one turn of a line around a
fixed cylinder can produce a large
change in tension.

378

Chapter 6

Friction

Note that ␤ is the total angle of belt contact and must be expressed in
radians. If a rope were wrapped around a drum n times, the angle ␤
would be 2␲n radians. Equation 6/7 holds equally well for a noncircular
section where the total angle of contact is ␤. This conclusion is evident
from the fact that the radius r of the circular drum in Fig. 6/11 does not
enter into the equations for the equilibrium of the differential element
of the belt.
The relation expressed by Eq. 6/7 also applies to belt drives where
both the belt and the pulley are rotating at constant speed. In this case
the equation describes the ratio of belt tensions for slippage or impending slippage. When the speed of rotation becomes large, the belt tends to
leave the rim, so Eq. 6/7 involves some error in this case.

6/9

r
P
L
a

A

p

Rolling Resistance

Deformation at the point of contact between a rolling wheel and its
supporting surface introduces a resistance to rolling, which we mention
only brieﬂy. This resistance is not due to tangential friction forces and
therefore is an entirely different phenomenon from that of dry friction.
To describe rolling resistance, we consider the wheel shown in Fig.
6/12 under the action of a load L on the axle and a force P applied at its
center to produce rolling. The deformation of the wheel and supporting
surfaces as shown is greatly exaggerated. The distribution of pressure p
over the area of contact is similar to the distribution shown. The resultant R of this distribution acts at some point A and must pass through
the wheel center for the wheel to be in equilibrium. We ﬁnd the force P
necessary to maintain rolling at constant speed by equating the moments of all forces about A to zero. This gives us

R

Figure 6/12

a
P ϭ r L ϭ ␮r L
where the moment arm of P is taken to be r. The ratio ␮r ϭ a/r is
called the coefﬁcient of rolling resistance. This coefﬁcient is the ratio of
resisting force to normal force and thus is analogous to the coefﬁcient
of static or kinetic friction. On the other hand, there is no slippage or
impending slippage in the interpretation of ␮r.
Because the dimension a depends on many factors which are difﬁcult to quantify, a comprehensive theory of rolling resistance is not
available. The distance a is a function of the elastic and plastic properties of the mating materials, the radius of the wheel, the speed of travel,
and the roughness of the surfaces. Some tests indicate that a varies only
slightly with wheel radius, and thus a is often taken to be independent
of the rolling radius. Unfortunately, the quantity a has also been called
the coefﬁcient of rolling friction in some references. However, a has the
dimension of length and therefore is not a dimensionless coefﬁcient in
the usual sense.

Article 6/9

Rolling Resistance

379

SAMPLE PROBLEM 6/9
α

A ﬂexible cable which supports the 100-kg load is passed over a ﬁxed circular drum and subjected to a force P to maintain equilibrium. The coefﬁcient of
static friction ␮ between the cable and the ﬁxed drum is 0.30. (a) For ␣ ϭ 0, determine the maximum and minimum values which P may have in order not to
raise or lower the load. (b) For P ϭ 500 N, determine the minimum value which
the angle ␣ may have before the load begins to slip.

P

r

O

100 kg

Impending slipping of the cable over the ﬁxed drum is given by Eq.
6/7, which is T2/T1 ϭ e␮␤.

Solution.

P

β = π /2
O

ᕡ (a) With ␣ ϭ 0 the angle of contact is ␤ ϭ ␲/2 rad. For impending upward motion of the load, T2 ϭ Pmax, T1 ϭ 981 N, and we have

ᕢ

Pmax/981 ϭ

e0.30(␲/2)

Pmax ϭ 981(1.602) ϭ 1572 N

981 N
(a) α = 0

Ans.

α

For impending downward motion of the load, T2 ϭ 981 N and T1 ϭ Pmin. Thus,
981/Pmin ϭ e0.30(␲/2)

Pmin ϭ 981/1.602 ϭ 612 N

P

β

Ans.

O

(b)

981 N

With T2 ϭ 981 N and T1 ϭ P ϭ 500 N, Eq. 6/7 gives us

(b) P = 500 N

981/500 ϭ e

0.30␤

␤ ϭ 2.25 rad

ᕣ

0.30␤ ϭ ln(981/500) ϭ 0.674
or

␤ ϭ 2.25

΂360΃ ϭ 128.7Њ
2␲

␣ ϭ 128.7Њ Ϫ 90Њ ϭ 38.7Њ

Helpful Hints
Ans.

ᕡ We are careful to note that ␤ must
be expressed in radians.

ᕢ In our derivation of Eq. 6/7 be certain to note that T2 Ͼ T1.

ᕣ As was noted in the derivation of Eq.
6/7, the radius of the drum does not
enter into the calculations. It is only
the angle of contact and the coefﬁcient of friction which determine the
limiting conditions for impending
motion of the ﬂexible cable over the
curved surface.

380

Chapter 6

Friction
ms = 0.20

SAMPLE PROBLEM 6/10
Determine the range of mass m over which the system is in static equilibrium. The coefﬁcient of static friction between the cord and the upper curved
surface is 0.20, while that between the block and the incline is 0.40. Neglect friction at the pivot O.

9 kg

r
L/3

r
d

30°

ms = 0.40

2L/3

A

m

25°
O

Solution. From the FBD of the uniform slender bar, we can determine the
tension TA in the cable at point A.
[ΣMO ϭ 0]

Ϫ TA

΂

΃

΂

΃

2L
L
cos 35Њ ϩ 9(9.81)
cos 25Њ ϭ 0
3
2
TA ϭ 73.3 N

q = 40°
TA

35°
G

A

25°

I. Motion of m impends up the incline.
The tension TA ϭ 73.3 N is the larger of the two tensions associated with
the rough rounded surface. From Eq. 6/7 we have

ᕡ [T2 ϭ T1e␮s␤]

73.3 ϭ T1e0.20[30Њ ϩ 40Њ]␲/180Њ

L/6

O
Ox

9(9.81) N
L/2

T1 ϭ 57.4 N

Oy

From the FBD of the block for Case I:
[ΣFy ϭ 0]
[ΣFx ϭ 0]

N Ϫ mg cos 40Њ ϭ 0

mg

N = 0.766mg

T1 = 57.4 N

Ϫ57.4 ϩ mg sin 40Њ ϩ 0.40(0.766mg) ϭ 0
mg ϭ 60.5 N

m ϭ 6.16 kg

y

II. Motion of m impends down the incline.
The value TA ϭ 73.3 N is unchanged, but now this is the smaller of the two
tensions in Eq. 6/7.
[T2 ϭ T1e␮s␤]

T2 ϭ 73.3e0.20[30Њ ϩ 40Њ]␲/180Њ

T2 ϭ 93.5 N

ᕢ

mg
T2 = 93.5 N

Ϫ93.5 – 0.4(0.766mg) ϩ mg sin 40Њ ϭ 0
mg ϭ 278 N

0.40N
Case I

Considering the FBD of the block for Case II, we see that the normal force N is
unchanged from Case I.
[ΣFx ϭ 0]

40°
x

N

m ϭ 28.3 kg

So the requested range is 6.16 Յ m Յ 28.3 kg.

Ans.

0.40N

40°
x

N
Case II

Helpful Hints

ᕡ Only the total angular contact enters
Eq. 6/7 (as ␤). So our results are independent of the quantities r and d.

ᕢ Re-solve the entire problem if the

ramp angle ␪ were changed to 20Њ,
with all other given information remaining constant. Be alert for a surprising result!

Article 6/9

PROBLEMS

Problems

381

P

Introductory Problems
6/97 What is the minimum coefﬁcient of friction ␮ between the rope and the ﬁxed shaft which will prevent the unbalanced cylinders from moving?
m

Problem 6/99

6/100 A dockworker adjusts a spring line (rope) which
keeps a ship from drifting alongside a wharf. If he
exerts a pull of 200 N on the rope, which has 11
4
turns around the mooring bit, what force T can he
support? The coefﬁcient of friction between the
rope and the cast-steel mooring bit is 0.30.

50 lb

100 lb
200 N

T

Problem 6/97

6/98 Determine the force P required to (a) raise and
(b) lower the 40-kg cylinder at a slow steady speed.
The coefﬁcient or friction between the cord and its
supporting surface is 0.30.

Problem 6/100

P
40 kg

6/101 A 50-kg package is attached to a rope which passes
over an irregularly shaped boulder with uniform
surface texture. If a downward force P ϭ 70 N is
required to lower the package at a constant rate,
(a) determine the coefﬁcient of friction ␮ between
the rope and the boulder. (b) What force PЈ would
be required to raise the package at a constant rate?

Problem 6/98

6/99 A force P ϭ mg /6 is required to lower the cylinder at
1
a constant slow speed with the cord making 14 turns
around the ﬁxed shaft. Calculate the coefﬁcient of
friction ␮ between the cord and the shaft.
P
50 kg
Problem 6/101

382

Chapter 6

Friction

6/102 With what horizontal force P must the worker pull
in order to move the 35-kg log up the 15Њ incline?
The coefﬁcient of friction between the log and the
incline is 0.60 and that between the rope and the
boulder is 0.40.
μ = 0.40
μ = 0.60

6/104 In western movies, cowboys are frequently observed hitching their horses by casually winding
a few turns of the reins around a horizontal pole
and letting the end hang free as shown––no
knots! If the freely hanging length of rein weighs
2 oz and the number of turns is as shown, what
tension T does the horse have to produce in the
direction shown in order to gain freedom? The coefficient of friction between the reins and wooden
pole is 0.70.

15°

Problem 6/102

6/103 A garden hose with a mass of 1.2 kg /m is in full
contact with the ground from B to C. What is the
horizontal component Px of the force which the gardener must exert in order to pull the hose around
the small cylindrical guard at B? The coefﬁcient of
friction between the hose and the ground is 0.50,
and that between the hose and the cylinder is 0.40.
Assume that the hose does not touch the ground
between A and B.

30°

Problem 6/104

Representative Problems
A

C

6/105 Calculate the horizontal force P required to raise
the 100-kg load. The coefﬁcient of friction between
the rope and the ﬁxed bars is 0.40.

5m

B
P

d

Problem 6/103
3d
—
2

d

100 kg
Problem 6/105

Article 6/9
6/106 The vertical consists of a frame, three ﬁxed 8-in.diameter drums, and six small guide wheels with a
combined weight of 50 lb. Determine the minimum
weight W necessary to hold the trolley in equilibrium
for any position in its vertical guides. The coefﬁcient of friction between the light cable and the
drums is 0.30.

383

6/108 The uniform crate of mass m is supported by the
tension in the ﬂexible strap passing under it. For a
given position ␪, determine an expression for the
tension T on the strap needed to begin (a) raising
the crate and (b) lowering the crate if the coefﬁcient of friction between the strap and the crate is ␮.
Neglect any friction between the crate and its vertical guides.

θ

8′′

Problems

θ

T

10′′

10′′
Problem 6/108

W

Problem 6/106

6/109 The positions of shafts A and C are ﬁxed while that
of shaft B can be varied via the vertical slot and the
locking bolt. If the coefﬁcient of static friction is ␮
at all interfaces, determine the dependence of T on
the coordinate y, where T is the tension required to
begin to lift the cylinder of mass m. All shafts are
ﬁxed against rotation.

6/107 The 180-lb tree surgeon lowers himself with the
rope over a horizontal limb of the tree. If the coefﬁcient of friction between the rope and the limb is
0.60, compute the force which the man must exert
on the rope to let himself down slowly.

r

B
y
r

r
A

C
3r

3r
m

T
Problem 6/109

Problem 6/107

*6/110 Repeat Prob. 6/109, only now the coefﬁcients of static friction are as follows: 0.60 at A and C and 0.20
at B. Plot T/mg as a function of y for 0 Յ y Յ 10r,
where r is the common radius of all three shafts.
What are the limiting values of T/mg for y ϭ 0 and
for large values of y?

384

Chapter 6

Friction

6/111 A counterclockwise moment M ϭ 1500 lb-in. is
applied to the ﬂywheel. If the coefﬁcient of friction
between the band and the wheel is 0.20, compute
the minimum force P necessary to prevent the
wheel from rotating.

6/113 For the design of the band brake shown, ﬁnd the
couple M required to turn the pipe in the V-block
against the action of the ﬂexible band. A force
P ϭ 25 lb is applied to the lever, which is pivoted
about O. The coefﬁcient of friction between the
band and the pipe is 0.30, and that between the
pipe and the block is 0.40. The weights of the parts
are negligible.

18′′

M

M

10″

P
45°

P

O
O
B
30°
5′′

30° 4″

A

15″

26′′
Problem 6/111

Problem 6/113

6/112 The endless belt of an escalator passes around
idler drum A and is driven by a torque M applied
to drum B. Belt tension is adjusted by a turnbuckle at C, which produces an initial tension of
1000 lb in each side of the belt when the escalator
is unloaded. For the design of this system calculate the minimum coefficient of friction ␮ between
drum B and the belt to prevent slipping if the
escalator handles 30 people uniformly distributed
along the belt and averaging 150 lb each. (Note: It
can be shown that the increase in belt tension on
the upper side of drum B and the decrease in belt
tension at the lower drum A are each equal to half
the component of the combined passenger weight
along the incline.)

6/114 Shown in the figure is the design of a band-type
oil-filter wrench. If the coefficient of friction between the band and the fixed filter is 0.25, determine the minimum value of h which ensures that
the wrench will not slip on the filter, regardless
of the magnitude of the force P. Neglect the mass
of the wrench and assume that the effect of the
small part A is equivalent to that of a band wrap
which begins at the three-o’clock position and
runs clockwise.
P
45
mm
A

B

B
7 mm

26
mm

h

M
20′
A

C

50′
Problem 6/112

Problem 6/114

Article 6/9
6/115 Determine the range of cylinder weights W for
which the system is in equilibrium. The coefﬁcient
of friction between the 100-lb block and the incline
is 0.20 and that between the cord and cylindrical
support surface is 0.30.

Problems

385

A
O

μ = 0.30

x

1m

100 lb

3m

μ = 0.20

Problem 6/117
20°

W

Problem 6/115

6/116 The cylinder of mass m is attached to the ring A,
which is suspended by the cable which passes
over the pulley, as shown in part a of the figure.
A couple M applied to the pulley turns it until
slipping of the cable on the pulley occurs at the
position ␪ ϭ 20Њ, shown in part b of the figure.
Calculate the coefficient of friction ␮ between
the cable and the pulley.

6/118 A device designed for lowering a person in a sling
down a rope at a constant controlled rate is shown
in the ﬁgure. The rope passes around a central shaft
ﬁxed to the frame and leads freely out of the lower
collar. The number of turns is adjusted by turning
the lower collar, which winds or unwinds the rope
around the shaft. Entrance of the rope into the
1
upper collar at A is equivalent to 4 of a turn, and
passage around the corner at B is also equivalent
to 1 of a turn. Friction of the rope through the
4
straight portions of the collars averages 10 N for
each collar. If three complete turns around the shaft,
in addition to the corner turns, are required for a
75-kg man to lower himself at a constant rate without exerting a pull on the free end of the rope, calculate the coefﬁcient of friction ␮ between the rope
and the contact surfaces of the device. Neglect the
small helix angle of the rope around the shafts.
L

L
M
90°

90°

θ

A

A

m

A

m

(a)

(b)

B

Problem 6/116

6/117 The uniform 3-m beam is suspended by the cable
which passes over the large pulley. A locking pin at
A prevents rotation of the pulley. If the coefﬁcient
of friction between the cable and the pulley is 0.25,
determine the minimum value of x for which the
cable will not slip on the pulley.

L
Problem 6/118

386

Chapter 6

Friction

6/119 Replace the ﬂat belt and pulley of Fig. 6 /11 by a
V-belt and matching grooved pulley as indicated by
the cross-sectional view accompanying this problem. Derive the relation among the belt tensions,
the angle of contact, and the coefﬁcient of friction
for the V-belt when slipping impends. A V-belt design with ␣ ϭ 35Њ would be equivalent to increasing
the coefﬁcient of friction for a ﬂat belt of the same
material by what factor n?
α

V-belt
cross section

᭤6/120 The chain has a mass ␳ per unit length and a length
␲r/2. For a coefﬁcient of friction ␮ between the
chain and its quarter-circular guide, derive an expression for the tension T required to initiate motion upward along the guide in the vertical plane.
(Hint: Obtain the equilibrium equations for a differential element of the chain and reduce them to
the form dT/d␪ ϩ KT ϭ f(␪), which is a ﬁrst-order,
linear, nonhomogeneous equation whose solution
takes the standard form

͵

T ϭ CeϪK␪ ϩ eϪK␪ e

K␪

f(␪) d␪

where C and K are constants.)
T

r
Problem 6/119

Problem 6/120

Article 6/10

6/10

Chapter Review

In our study of friction we have concentrated on dry or Coulomb
friction where a simple mechanical model of surface irregularities between the contacting bodies, Fig. 6/1, explains the phenomenon adequately for most engineering purposes. This model helps to visualize the
three types of dry-friction problems which are encountered in practice.
These problem types are:
1. Static friction of less than the maximum possible value and determined by the equations of equilibrium. (This usually requires a
check to see that F Ͻ ␮s N.)
2. Limiting static friction with impending motion (F ϭ ␮s N ).
3. Kinetic friction where sliding motion occurs between contacting
surfaces (F ϭ ␮k N ).
Keep in mind the following when solving dry-friction problems:
1. A coefﬁcient of friction applies to a given pair of mating surfaces. It
is meaningless to speak of a coefﬁcient of friction for a single surface.
2. The coefﬁcient of static friction ␮s for a given pair of surfaces is
usually slightly greater than the kinetic coefﬁcient ␮k.
3. The friction force which acts on a body is always in the direction to
oppose the slipping of the body which takes place or the slipping
which would take place in the absence of friction.
4. When friction forces are distributed over a surface or along a line,
we select a representative element of the surface or line and evaluate the force and moment effects of the elemental friction force acting on the element. We then integrate these effects over the entire
surface or line.
5. Friction coefﬁcients vary considerably, depending on the exact condition of the mating surfaces. Computing coefﬁcients of friction to
three signiﬁcant ﬁgures represents an accuracy which cannot easily
be duplicated by experiment. When cited, such values are included
for purposes of computational check only. For design computations
in engineering practice, any handbook value for a coefﬁcient of static or kinetic friction must be viewed as an approximation.
Other forms of friction mentioned in the introductory article of the
chapter are important in engineering. Problems which involve ﬂuid friction, for example, are among the most important of the friction problems encountered in engineering, and are studied in the subject of ﬂuid
mechanics.

Chapter Review

387

388

Chapter 6

Friction

REVIEW PROBLEMS
6/121 A 100-lb block is placed on a 30Њ incline and released from rest. The coefﬁcient of static friction
between the block and the incline is 0.30. (a) Determine the maximum and minimum values of the initial tension T in the spring for which the block will
not slip when released. (b) Calculate the friction
force F on the block if T ϭ 40 lb.

6/124 The ﬁgure shows a jam cleat designed for a sailboat
where the large friction forces developed by the
cams prevent the rope from slipping. Determine
the force R supported by each cam bearing for the
900-N rope tension. The coefﬁcient of static friction
between the rope and the cams is 0.80.

900 N
b

0l

10

80
mm

μ s = 0.30
30°

20 mm

Problem 6/121

6/122 The circular cylinder weighs 50 lb and is held by a
cord ﬁxed to its periphery at B and to the ground
at A. If the coefﬁcient of static friction is 0.60, calculate the force P required to cause the cylinder to slip.
B

P
60°

A

Problem 6/124

6/125 The design of the cam-lock vise provides a quick
positive clamping action with a friction coefﬁcient
between the cam and the movable jaw A of 0.30.
(a) As the cam and lever are rotating clockwise
approaching the locking position shown with
P ϭ 30 lb, determine the clamping force C. (b) With
P removed, ﬁnd the friction force F in the locking
position. (c) Determine the force PЈ, opposite from P,
required to release the clamp.
10″

μ s = 0.60

P

1
—″
2

Problem 6/122

6/123 The homogeneous disk of mass m is resting on the
right-angled supporting surfaces shown. The tension P in the cord is very gradually increased from
zero. If the friction at both A and B is characterized
by ␮s ϭ 0.25, what happens ﬁrst––does the homogeneous disk slip in place or does it begin to roll up
the incline? Determine the value of P at which this
ﬁrst movement occurs.
P

O

A
2″
Problem 6/125

6/126 Three boxes are placed on the incline in contact with
each other and released from rest. The coefﬁcients of
static friction under boxes A, B, and C are 0.30, 0.20,
and 0.35, respectively. Describe what happens.

B

30°

B

A 20 lb

A

μ s = 0.25
Problem 6/123

15°

μ s = 0.30

40 lb

C 30 lb

0.35
0.20

Problem 6/126

Article 6/10
6/127 A 500-kg log is being steadily pulled up the incline
by means of the cable attached to the winch on the
truck. If the coefﬁcient of kinetic friction is 0.80 between the log and the incline and 0.50 between the
cable and rock, determine the tension T which must
be developed by the winch.
25°

Review Problems

389

6/130 Under the action of the applied couple M the 25-kg
cylinder bears against the roller A, which is free to
turn. If the coefﬁcients of static and kinetic friction
between the cylinder and the horizontal surface are
0.50 and 0.40, respectively, determine the friction
force F acting on the cylinder if (a) M ϭ 20 N ⅐ m
and (b) M ϭ 40 N ⅐ m.

15°
M
100 mm

A

30°

150
mm
Problem 6/127

6/128 Calculate the torque M which the engine of the
pickup truck must supply to the rear axle to roll
the front wheels over the curbing from a rest position if the rear wheels do not slip. Determine the
minimum effective coefﬁcient of friction at the rear
wheels to prevent slipping. The mass of the loaded
truck with mass center at G is 1900 kg.

G

Problem 6/130

6/131 The screw of the small press has a mean diameter
of 25 mm and has a single square thread with a
lead of 8 mm. The flat thrust bearing at A is
shown in the enlarged view and has surfaces
which are well worn. If the coefficient of friction
for both the threads and the bearing at A is 0.25,
calculate the design torque M on the handwheel
required (a) to produce a compressive force of
4 kN and (b) to loosen the press from the 4-kN
compression.

650 mm
130 mm

1600 mm

1200 mm

Problem 6/128

6/129 The 4600-lb lathe with mass center at G is positioned with the aid of the 5Њ steel wedge. Determine
the horizontal force P required to remove the wedge
if the coefﬁcient of friction for all contacting surfaces is 0.30. Also show that no horizontal movement of the lathe takes places.

25
mm
A
A

4 mm

Problem 6/131

G
B

A

P
5°

36"
92"
Problem 6/129

20 mm

390

Chapter 6

Friction

6/132 The small roller of the uniform slender rod rests
against the vertical surface at A while the
rounded end at B rests on the platform which is
slowly pivoted downward beginning from the
horizontal position shown. If the bar begins to
slip when ␪ ϭ 25Њ, determine the coefficient of
static friction ␮s between the bar and the platform.
Neglect friction in the roller and the small thickness of the platform.

6/134 The bar clamp is being used to clamp two boards
together while the glue between them cures. What
torque M must be applied to the handle of the
screw in order to produce an 80-lb compression between the boards? The 3-in.-diameter single-thread
8
screw has 12 square threads per inch, and the
effective coefﬁcient of friction is 0.20. Neglect any
friction in the pivot contact at C. What torque MЈ is
required to loosen the clamp?

A

M
2l
C
O

B
l

Problem 6/134
θ

Problem 6/132

6/133 Determine the range of mass m over which the system is in equilibrium (a) if the coefﬁcient of static
friction is 0.20 at all three ﬁxed shafts and (b) if the
coefﬁcient of static friction associated with shaft B
is increased to 0.50.

6/135 The detent mechanism consists of the spring-loaded
plunger with a spherical end, which is designed to
position the horizontal bar by engaging the spaced
notches. If the spring exerts a force of 40 N on the
plunger in the position shown and a force P ϭ 60 N
is required to move the detent bar against the
plunger, calculate the coefﬁcient of friction between
the plunger and the detent. It is known from earlier tests that the coefﬁcient of friction between the
light bar and the horizontal surface is 0.30. Assume
that the plunger is well lubricated and accurately
ﬁtted so that the friction between it and its guide is
negligible.

C
A
2 kg
B

60° 60°

m
Problem 6/135
Problem 6/133

P

Article 6/10
6/136 Determine the range of cylinder mass m for which
the system is in equilibrium. The coefﬁcient of friction between the 50-kg block and the incline is 0.15
and that between the cord and cylindrical support
is 0.25.

Review Problems

391

6/138 The cylinder weighs 80 lb and the attached uniform
slender bar has an unknown weight W. The unit remains in static equilibrium for values of the angle ␪
ranging up to 45Њ but slips if ␪ exceeds 45Њ. If the
coefﬁcient of static friction is known to be 0.30, determine W.

μ = 0.25

W
50 kg

θ
40
″

μ = 0.15

20°
12″
60°

60°

m
Problem 6/138
Problem 6/136

6/137 The elements of a rolling mill are shown here. In
the design of the roller spacing, determine the maximum slab thickness b so that the slab will enter
the rollers by means of friction alone if the coefﬁcient of kinetic friction is ␮k. Assume that (b Ϫ a) is
small compared with d.

6/139 Calculate the couple M applied to the lower of the
two 20-kg cylinders which will allow them to roll
slowly down the incline. The coefﬁcients of static
and kinetic friction for all contacting surfaces are
␮s ϭ 0.60 and ␮k ϭ 0.50.
300 mm dia.

M

C

d
B
A
15°
a

b

Problem 6/139
d

6/140 The 8-kg block is resting on the 20Њ inclined plane
with a coefﬁcient of static friction ␮s ϭ 0.50. Determine the minimum horizontal force P which will
cause the block to slip.

Problem 6/137
P
20°

Problem 6/140

392

Chapter 6

Friction

᭤ 6/141 The device shown is designed to prevent clockwise
rotation in the horizontal plane of the central
wheel by means of frictional locking of the two
small rollers. For given values of R and r and for a
common coefﬁcient of friction ␮ at all contact surfaces, determine the range of values of d for which
the device will operate as described.

*Computer-Oriented Problems
*6/143 Plot the force P required to begin moving the 100-kg
crate up the 10Њ incline starting from rest at various values of x from zero to 10 m. Determine the
least possible value of P and the corresponding
value of x.

r
R

P
3m
100 kg

d

x
0

10°

μ s = 0.4

Problem 6/141

᭤ 6/142 A scissors-type jack with a single square thread
which engages the threaded collar G and turns in a
ball thrust bearing at D is being designed. The
thread is to have a mean diameter of 10 mm and a
lead (advancement per revolution) of 3 mm. With a
coefﬁcient of friction of 0.20 for the greased threads,
(a) calculate the torque M on the screw required to
raise a load of 1000 kg from the position shown and
(b) calculate the torque M required to lower the
load from the same position. Assume that platform
AB and line DG will remain horizontal under load.
Neglect friction in the bearing at D.
L

Problem 6/143

* 6/144 The uniform slender bar of Prob. 6/41 is repeated
here but now the ideal roller at B is removed. The
coefﬁcient of static friction at A is 0.70 and that at
B is 0.50. Determine the maximum value of the
angle ␪ for which equilibrium is possible.

R
A
2R

A

B
45° 45°
30° 30°

H

B
C
Problem 6/144

I
30°
G

30°

30°

M

30°

F

D

E

GI = DI = 160 mm, HI = CI = 80 mm
Problem 6/142

Article 6/10
*6/145 The semicylindrical shell of mass m and radius r is
rolled through an angle ␪ by the force P which remains tangent to its periphery at A as shown. If
P is slowly increased, plot the tilt angle ␪ as a function of P up to the point of slipping. Determine the
tilt angle ␪max and the corresponding value Pmax
for which slipping occurs. The coefﬁcient of static
friction is 0.30.
P

Review Problems

393

* 6/147 A heavy cable with a mass of 12 kg per meter of
length passes over the two ﬁxed pipes 300 m apart
on the same level. One end supports a 1600-kg
cylinder. By experiment it is found that a downward force P of 60 kN is required to induce slipping
of the cable over both pipes at a constant rate.
Determine the coefﬁcient of kinetic friction ␮k between the cable and the pipes, the maximum tension T in the cable between the pipes, and the sag h
in the cable.

A

300 m

θ

r

h

μ s = 0.30
P
1600 kg
Problem 6/145
Problem 6/147

*6/146 The positions of shafts A and C are ﬁxed while that
of shaft B can be varied via the vertical slot and locking bolt. The coefﬁcients of kinetic friction are 0.60
at A and C and 0.20 at B. Plot the quantity T/mg as
a function of y for 0 Յ y Յ 10r, where T is the tension required to lift the cylinder of mass m at a
steady rate and r is the common radius of all three
shafts. All shafts are ﬁxed against rotation. What are
the limiting values of T/mg for y ϭ 0 and for large
values of y?
3r

* 6/148 The 100-kg load is elevated by the cable which
slides over the ﬁxed drum with a coefﬁcient of friction of 0.50. The cable is secured to the slider A
which is pulled slowly along its smooth horizontal
guide bar by the force P. Plot P as a function of ␪
from ␪ ϭ 90Њ to ␪ ϭ 10Њ and determine its maximum value along with the corresponding angle ␪.
Check your plotted value of Pmax analytically.
μ = 0.50

3r

r

r
C

A

y
r
B
m

T

100
kg

θ

Problem 6/146

P
A

Problem 6/148

394

Chapter 6

Friction

*6/149 The uniform slender pole rests against a small
roller at B. End A will not slip on the horizontal
surface if the coefﬁcient of static friction ␮s is sufﬁciently large. (a) Determine the required minimum
value of ␮s to prevent slipping for any value of ␪
from ␪ ϭ 0 to ␪ ϭ 60Њ and plot ␮s versus ␪. From
these results ﬁnd the range of ␪ for which the pole
will be unstable if ␮s ϭ 0.40. (b) At what angle ␪ is
the pole most unstable, and what is the least coefﬁcient of static friction ␮s which would be required
to prevent slipping for this angle?

* 6/151 The band wrench is useful for loosening and tightening such items as the whole-house water ﬁlter E
shown. Assume that the teeth of the wrench do not
slip on the band at point C and that the band is
slack from C to its end D. Determine the minimum
coefﬁcient ␮ of static friction for which the band
will not slip relative to the ﬁxed ﬁlter.
250 mm
P
B
55
mm
O
E

B
L

θ

A

Problem 6/149

*6/150 The device is designed to permit an adjustment
to the horizontal tension T in the cable passing
around the two ﬁxed wheels in order to lower the
mass m. If the coefﬁcient of friction between the
cable and the wheel surfaces is 0.40, determine and
plot the ratio T/mg as a function of ␪ in the range
0 Ͻ ␪ Ͻ 90Њ. Also ﬁnd the value of the shear force V
in the adjusting pin at D in terms of mg for ␪ ϭ 60Њ.

D

T
O
r
___
DO = 3r
___
BC = 2r

C
r
A

m

Problem 6/150

D

C

Problem 6/151
L/2

B

A

This page intentionally left blank

The analysis of multi-link structures which change conﬁguration is generally best handled by a virtual-work
approach.
© Media Bakery

7

Virtual Work
CHAPTER OUTLINE
7/1 Introduction

7/4 Potential Energy and Stability

7/2 Work

7/5 Chapter Review

7/3 Equilibrium

7/1

Introduction

In the previous chapters we have analyzed the equilibrium of a
body by isolating it with a free-body diagram and writing the zeroforce and zero-moment summation equations. This approach is usually employed for a body whose equilibrium position is known or
specified and where one or more of the external forces is an unknown
to be determined.
There is a separate class of problems in which bodies are composed
of interconnected members which can move relative to each other. Thus
various equilibrium conﬁgurations are possible and must be examined.
For problems of this type, the force- and moment-equilibrium equations,
although valid and adequate, are often not the most direct and convenient approach.
A method based on the concept of the work done by a force is
more direct. Also, the method provides a deeper insight into the behavior of mechanical systems and enables us to examine the stability
of systems in equilibrium. This method is called the method of virtual
work.

7/2

Work

We must ﬁrst deﬁne the term work in its quantitative sense, in contrast to its common nontechnical usage.

397

398

Chapter 7

F
α
F cos α

Virtual Work

A

Work of a Force
Consider the constant force F acting on the body shown in Fig. 7/1a,
whose movement along the plane from A to AЈ is represented by the vector ⌬s, called the displacement of the body. By deﬁnition the work U
done by the force F on the body during this displacement is the component of the force in the direction of the displacement times the displacement, or

A′

Δs

(a)
F

A

A′

Δs
α
Δs

cos

α

U ϭ (F cos ␣) ⌬s

(b)

From Fig. 7/1b we see that the same result is obtained if we multiply the
magnitude of the force by the component of the displacement in the direction of the force. This gives

Figure 7/1

F

U ϭ F(⌬s cos ␣)

θ Δs

Because we obtain the same result regardless of the direction in which
we resolve the vectors, we conclude that work U is a scalar quantity.
Work is positive when the working component of the force is in the
same direction as the displacement. When the working component is in
the direction opposite to the displacement, Fig. 7/2, the work done is
negative. Thus,

α

Figure 7/2

F

A′
A dr
α

U ϭ (F cos ␣) ⌬s ϭ Ϫ(F cos ␪) ⌬s

A2

A1
r

We now generalize the deﬁnition of work to account for conditions
under which the direction of the displacement and the magnitude and
direction of the force are variable.
Figure 7/3a shows a force F acting on a body at a point A which
moves along the path shown from A1 to A2. Point A is located by its position vector r measured from some arbitrary but convenient origin O.
The inﬁnitesimal displacement in the motion from A to AЈ is given by
the differential change dr of the position vector. The work done by the
force F during the displacement dr is deﬁned as

r + dr

O
(a)

F
os

Fc

α

dr
α
A ds co
s

A2

α =|
dr| c
os

A1
(b)

Figure 7/3

α

dU ϭ F ⅐ dr

(7/1)

If F denotes the magnitude of the force F and ds denotes the magnitude
of the differential displacement dr, we use the deﬁnition of the dot product to obtain
dU ϭ F ds cos ␣
We may again interpret this expression as the force component F cos ␣
in the direction of the displacement times the displacement, or as the
displacement component ds cos ␣ in the direction of the force times the

Article 7/2

Work

399

force, as represented in Fig. 7/3b. If we express F and dr in terms of
their rectangular components, we have
dU ϭ (iFx ϩ jFy ϩ kFz) ⅐ (i dx ϩ j dy ϩ k dz)
ϭ Fx dx ϩ Fy dy ϩ Fz dz
To obtain the total work U done by F during a ﬁnite movement of
point A from A1 to A2, Fig. 7/3a, we integrate dU between these positions. Thus,
Uϭ

͵ F ⅐ dr ϭ ͵ (F dx ϩ F dy ϩ F dz)
x

y

z

or
Uϭ

͵ F cos ␣ ds

To carry out this integration, we must know the relation between the
force components and their respective coordinates, or the relations between F and s and between cos ␣ and s.
In the case of concurrent forces which are applied at any particular
point on a body, the work done by their resultant equals the total work
done by the several forces. This is because the component of the resultant in the direction of the displacement equals the sum of the components of the several forces in the same direction.

Work of a Couple
In addition to the work done by forces, couples also can do work. In
Fig. 7/4a the couple M acts on the body and changes its angular position
by an amount d␪. The work done by the couple is easily determined from
the combined work of the two forces which constitute the couple. In part
b of the ﬁgure we represent the couple by two equal and opposite forces F
and ϪF acting at two arbitrary points A and B such that F ϭ M/b. During the inﬁnitesimal movement in the plane of the ﬁgure, line AB moves
to AЉBЈ. We now take the displacement of A in two steps, ﬁrst, a displacement drB equal to that of B and, second, a displacement drA/B (read as
the displacement of A with respect to B) due to the rotation about B.
Thus the work done by F during the displacement from A to AЈ is equal
and opposite in sign to that due to ϪF acting through the equal displacement from B to BЈ. We therefore conclude that no work is done by a couple during a translation (movement without rotation).
During the rotation, however, F does work equal to F ⅐ drA/B ϭ
Fb d␪, where drA/B ϭ b d␪ and where d␪ is the inﬁnitesimal angle of rotation in radians. Since M ϭ Fb, we have

dθ

M

(a)

drB

F

⏐drA/B⏐ = b dθ

A′

A″

A
dθ

b
–F

B′
B

drB
(b)

dU ϭ M d␪

(7/2)

Figure 7/4

400

Chapter 7

Virtual Work

The work of the couple is positive if M has the same sense as d␪ (clockwise in this illustration), and negative if M has a sense opposite to that
of the rotation. The total work of a couple during a ﬁnite rotation in its
plane becomes
Uϭ

͵ M d␪

Dimensions of Work
Work has the dimensions of (force) ϫ (distance). In SI units the unit
of work is the joule (J), which is the work done by a force of one newton
moving through a distance of one meter in the direction of the force
(J ϭ N ⅐ m). In the U.S. customary system the unit of work is the footpound (ft-lb), which is the work done by a one-pound force moving
through a distance of one foot in the direction of the force.
The dimensions of the work of a force and the moment of a force are
the same although they are entirely different physical quantities. Note
that work is a scalar given by the dot product and thus involves the
product of a force and a distance, both measured along the same line.
Moment, on the other hand, is a vector given by the cross product and
involves the product of force and distance measured at right angles to
the force. To distinguish between these two quantities when we write
their units, in SI units we use the joule (J) for work and reserve the
combined units newton-meter (N ⅐ m) for moment. In the U.S. customary system we normally use the sequence foot-pound (ft-lb) for work
and pound-foot (lb-ft) for moment.
Virtual Work
We consider now a particle whose static equilibrium position is determined by the forces which act on it. Any assumed and arbitrary small
displacement ␦r away from this natural position and consistent with the
system constraints is called a virtual displacement. The term virtual is
used to indicate that the displacement does not really exist but only is
assumed to exist so that we may compare various possible equilibrium
positions to determine the correct one.
The work done by any force F acting on the particle during the virtual displacement ␦r is called virtual work and is
␦U ϭ F ⅐ ␦r

or

␦U ϭ F ␦s cos ␣

where ␣ is the angle between F and ␦r, and ␦s is the magnitude of ␦r.
The difference between dr and ␦r is that dr refers to an actual inﬁnitesimal change in position and can be integrated, whereas ␦r refers to an
inﬁnitesimal virtual or assumed movement and cannot be integrated.
Mathematically both quantities are ﬁrst-order differentials.
A virtual displacement may also be a rotation ␦␪ of a body. According to Eq. 7/2 the virtual work done by a couple M during a virtual angular displacement ␦␪ is ␦U ϭ M ␦␪.
We may regard the force F or couple M as remaining constant
during any infinitesimal virtual displacement. If we account for any

Article 7/3

Equilibrium

change in F or M during the infinitesimal motion, higher-order terms
will result which disappear in the limit. This consideration is the
same mathematically as that which permits us to neglect the product
dx dy when writing dA ϭ y dx for the element of area under the curve
y ϭ ƒ(x).

7/3

Equilibrium

We now express the equilibrium conditions in terms of virtual work,
ﬁrst for a particle, then for a single rigid body, and then for a system of
connected rigid bodies.

Equilibrium of a Particle
Consider the particle or small body in Fig. 7/5 which attains an
equilibrium position as a result of the forces in the attached springs. If
the mass of the particle were signiﬁcant, then the weight mg would also
be included as one of the forces. For an assumed virtual displacement ␦r
of the particle away from its equilibrium position, the total virtual work
done on the particle is

3
2

1

δr

4

␦U ϭ F1 ⅐ ␦r ϩ F2 ⅐ ␦r ϩ F3 ⅐ ␦r ϩ ⅐ ⅐ ⅐ ϭ ΣF ⅐ ␦r
We now express ΣF in terms of its scalar sums and ␦r in terms of
its component virtual displacements in the coordinate directions, as
follows:

F2

F3

δr

␦U ϭ ΣF ⅐ ␦r ϭ (i ΣFx ϩ j ΣFy ϩ k ΣFz) ⅐ (i ␦x ϩ j ␦y ϩ k ␦z)
ϭ ΣFx ␦x ϩ ΣFy ␦y ϩ ΣFz ␦z ϭ 0
The sum is zero, since ΣF ϭ 0, which gives ΣFx = 0, ΣFy = 0, and ΣFz ϭ
0. The equation ␦U ϭ 0 is therefore an alternative statement of the
equilibrium conditions for a particle. This condition of zero virtual work
for equilibrium is both necessary and sufﬁcient, since we may apply it to
virtual displacements taken one at a time in each of the three mutually
perpendicular directions, in which case it becomes equivalent to the
three known scalar requirements for equilibrium.
The principle of zero virtual work for the equilibrium of a single
particle usually does not simplify this already simple problem because
␦U ϭ 0 and ΣF ϭ 0 provide the same information. However, we introduce the concept of virtual work for a particle so that we can later apply
it to systems of particles.

Equilibrium of a Rigid Body
We can easily extend the principle of virtual work for a single particle to a rigid body treated as a system of small elements or particles
rigidly attached to one another. Because the virtual work done on each
particle of the body in equilibrium is zero, it follows that the virtual
work done on the entire rigid body is zero. Only the virtual work done
by external forces appears in the evaluation of ␦U ϭ 0 for the entire

F1

Figure 7/5

F4

401

402

Chapter 7

Virtual Work

P
a

δθ

O

R
b

Figure 7/6

body, since all internal forces occur in pairs of equal, opposite, and
collinear forces, and the net work done by these forces during any movement is zero.
As in the case of a particle, we again ﬁnd that the principle of virtual work offers no particular advantage to the solution for a single rigid
body in equilibrium. Any assumed virtual displacement deﬁned by a linear or angular movement will appear in each term in ␦U ϭ 0 and when
canceled will leave us with the same expression we would have obtained
by using one of the force or moment equations of equilibrium directly.
This condition is illustrated in Fig. 7/6, where we want to determine
the reaction R under the roller for the hinged plate of negligible weight
under the action of a given force P. A small assumed rotation ␦␪ of the
plate about O is consistent with the hinge constraint at O and is taken
as the virtual displacement. The work done by P is ϪPa ␦␪, and the
work done by R is ϩRb ␦␪. Therefore, the principle ␦U ϭ 0 gives
ϪPa ␦␪ ϩ Rb ␦␪ ϭ 0
Canceling ␦␪ leaves

B

Pa Ϫ Rb ϭ 0

P

A
F

which is simply the equation of moment equilibrium about O. Therefore, nothing is gained by using the virtual-work principle for a single
rigid body. The principle is, however, decidedly advantageous for interconnected bodies, as discussed next.

O

(a) Active forces
FB

B

A

FO

O

(b) Reactive forces

A
A

FA
–FA

(c) Internal forces

Figure 7/7

Equilibrium of Ideal Systems of Rigid Bodies
We now extend the principle of virtual work to the equilibrium of an
interconnected system of rigid bodies. Our treatment here will be limited to so-called ideal systems. These are systems composed of two or
more rigid members linked together by mechanical connections which
are incapable of absorbing energy through elongation or compression,
and in which friction is small enough to be neglected.
Figure 7/7a shows a simple example of an ideal system where relative motion between its two parts is possible and where the equilibrium
position is determined by the applied external forces P and F. We can
identify three types of forces which act in such an interconnected system. They are as follows:
(1) Active forces are external forces capable of doing virtual work
during possible virtual displacements. In Fig. 7/7a forces P and F are
active forces because they would do work as the links move.
(2) Reactive forces are forces which act at ﬁxed support positions
where no virtual displacement takes place in the direction of the force.
Reactive forces do no work during a virtual displacement. In Fig. 7/7b
the horizontal force FB exerted on the roller end of the member by the
vertical guide can do no work because there can be no horizontal
displacement of the roller. The reactive force FO exerted on the system
by the ﬁxed support at O also does no work because O cannot move.

Article 7/3

(3) Internal forces are forces in the connections between members.
During any possible movement of the system or its parts, the net work
done by the internal forces at the connections is zero. This is so because
the internal forces always exist in pairs of equal and opposite forces, as
indicated for the internal forces FA and ϪFA at joint A in Fig. 7/7c. The
work of one force therefore necessarily cancels the work of the other
force during their identical displacements.

Principle of Virtual Work
Noting that only the external active forces do work during any possible movement of the system, we may now state the principle of virtual
work as follows:
The virtual work done by external active forces on an ideal
mechanical system in equilibrium is zero for any and all
virtual displacements consistent with the constraints.
By constraint we mean restriction of the motion by the supports. We
state the principle mathematically by the equation
␦U ϭ 0

(7/3)

where ␦U stands for the total virtual work done on the system by all active forces during a virtual displacement.
Only now can we see the real advantages of the method of virtual
work. There are essentially two. First, it is not necessary for us to dismember ideal systems in order to establish the relations between the
active forces, as is generally the case with the equilibrium method
based on force and moment summations. Second, we may determine
the relations between the active forces directly without reference to the
reactive forces. These advantages make the method of virtual work particularly useful in determining the position of equilibrium of a system
under known loads. This type of problem is in contrast to the problem
of determining the forces acting on a body whose equilibrium position
is known.
The method of virtual work is especially useful for the purposes
mentioned but requires that the internal friction forces do negligible
work during any virtual displacement. Consequently, if internal friction
in a mechanical system is appreciable, the method of virtual work cannot be used for the system as a whole unless the work done by internal
friction is included.
When using the method of virtual work, you should draw a diagram
which isolates the system under consideration. Unlike the free-body diagram, where all forces are shown, the diagram for the method of virtual
work need show only the active forces, since the reactive forces do not
enter into the application of ␦U ϭ 0. Such a drawing will be termed an
active-force diagram. Figure 7/7a is an active-force diagram for the system shown.

Equilibrium

403

404

Chapter 7

Virtual Work

P

P2

P1
P1

P1

P2

θ1

s2

s1

P3
θ2

M
θ

P2

θ

m1 g

P2

P1
P

θ1

θ2

m2 g

x

mg

(a) Examples of one-degree-of-freedom systems

(b) Examples of two-degree-of-freedom systems

Figure 7/8
mg

Degrees of Freedom
The number of degrees of freedom of a mechanical system is the
number of independent coordinates needed to specify completely the
conﬁguration of the system. Figure 7/8a shows three examples of onedegree-of-freedom systems. Only one coordinate is needed to establish
the position of every part of the system. The coordinate can be a distance or an angle. Figure 7/8b shows three examples of two-degree-offreedom systems where two independent coordinates are needed to
determine the conﬁguration of the system. By the addition of more links
to the mechanism in the right-hand ﬁgure, there is no limit to the number of degrees of freedom which can be introduced.
The principle of virtual work ␦U ϭ 0 may be applied as many times
as there are degrees of freedom. With each application, we allow only
one independent coordinate to change at a time while holding the others
constant. In our treatment of virtual work in this chapter, we consider
only one-degree-of-freedom systems.*

δx

P
F = μkN
N
(a)
mg

P
F < μs N

N
(b)

θ

δθ 1

Mƒ
Mƒ
δθ 2

Systems with Friction
When sliding friction is present to any appreciable degree in a mechanical system, the system is said to be “real.” In real systems some of
the positive work done on the system by external active forces (input
work) is dissipated in the form of heat generated by the kinetic friction
forces during movement of the system. When there is sliding between
contacting surfaces, the friction force does negative work because its direction is always opposite to the movement of the body on which it acts.
This negative work cannot be regained.
Thus, the kinetic friction force ␮k N acting on the sliding block in
Fig. 7/9a does work on the block during the displacement x in the
amount of Ϫ␮kNx. During a virtual displacement ␦x, the friction force
does work equal to Ϫ␮k N ␦x. The static friction force acting on the

(c)

Figure 7/9

*For examples of solutions to problems of two or more degrees of freedom, see Chapter 7 of
the ﬁrst author’s Statics, 2nd Edition, 1971, or SI Version, 1975.

Article 7/3

Equilibrium

405

rolling wheel in Fig. 7/9b, on the other hand, does no work if the wheel
does not slip as it rolls.
In Fig. 7/9c the moment Mƒ about the center of the pinned joint due
to the friction forces which act at the contacting surfaces does negative
work during any relative angular movement between the two parts.
Thus, for a virtual displacement ␦␪ between the two parts, which have
the separate virtual displacements ␦␪1 and ␦␪2 as shown, the negative
work done is ϪMƒ ␦␪1 Ϫ Mƒ ␦␪2 ϭ ϪMƒ(␦␪1 ϩ ␦␪2), or simply ϪMƒ ␦␪. For
each part, Mƒ is in the sense to oppose the relative motion of rotation.
It was noted earlier in the article that a major advantage of the
method of virtual work is in the analysis of an entire system of connected members without taking them apart. If there is appreciable kinetic friction internal to the system, it becomes necessary to dismember
the system to determine the friction forces. In such cases the method of
virtual work ﬁnds only limited use.

Mechanical Efﬁciency
Because of energy loss due to friction, the output work of a machine
is always less than the input work. The ratio of the two amounts of
work is the mechanical efﬁciency e. Thus,
eϭ

output work
input work

The mechanical efﬁciency of simple machines which have a single degree of freedom and which operate in a uniform manner may be determined by the method of work by evaluating the numerator and
denominator of the expression for e during a virtual displacement.
As an example, consider the block being moved up the inclined
plane in Fig. 7/10. For the virtual displacement ␦s shown, the output
work is that necessary to elevate the block, or mg ␦s sin ␪. The input
work is T ␦s ϭ (mg sin ␪ ϩ ␮kmg cos ␪) ␦s. The efﬁciency of the inclined
plane is, therefore,
eϭ

mg ␦s sin ␪
1
ϭ
mg(sin ␪ ϩ ␮k cos ␪) ␦s 1 ϩ ␮k cot ␪

As a second example, consider the screw jack described in Art. 6/5
and shown in Fig. 6/6. Equation 6/3 gives the moment M required to
raise the load W, where the screw has a mean radius r and a helix angle
␣, and where the friction angle is ␾ ϭ tanϪ1 ␮k. During a small rotation
␦␪ of the screw, the input work is M ␦␪ ϭ Wr ␦␪ tan (␣ ϩ ␾). The output
work is that required to elevate the load, or Wr ␦␪ tan ␣. Thus the efﬁciency of the jack can be expressed as
eϭ

Wr ␦␪ tan ␣
tan ␣
ϭ
Wr ␦␪ tan (␣ ϩ ␾) tan (␣ ϩ ␾)

As friction is decreased, ␾ becomes smaller, and the efﬁciency approaches unity.

mg

θ

δs

μ k mg cos θ

Figure 7/10

T

406

Chapter 7

Virtual Work

SAMPLE PROBLEM 7/1
P

Each of the two uniform hinged bars has a mass m and a length l, and is
supported and loaded as shown. For a given force P determine the angle ␪ for
equilibrium.
l

l
θ

The active-force diagram for the system composed of the two members is shown separately and includes the weight mg of each bar in addition to
the force P. All other forces acting externally on the system are reactive forces
which do no work during a virtual movement ␦x and are therefore not shown.
The principle of virtual work requires that the total work of all external active forces be zero for any virtual displacement consistent with the constraints.
Thus, for a movement ␦x the virtual work becomes

Solution.

ᕡ [␦U ϭ 0]

+x
P
+h

P ␦x ϩ 2mg ␦h ϭ 0

We now express each of these virtual displacements in terms of the variable ␪,
the required quantity. Hence,
␪
x ϭ 2l sin
2

and

mg

␪
␦x ϭ l cos ␦␪
2

and

ᕡ Note carefully that with x positive to

␪
l
␦h ϭ Ϫ sin ␦␪
2
4

Substitution into the equation of virtual work gives us
Pl cos

␪
␪
l
␦␪ Ϫ 2mg sin ␦␪ ϭ 0
2
2
4

from which we get
tan

␪
2P
ϭ
2 mg

or

2P
␪ ϭ 2 tanϪ1 mg

mg

Helpful Hints

ᕢ Similarly,
␪
l
h ϭ cos
2
2

θ

Ans.

To obtain this result by the principles of force and moment summation, it
would be necessary to dismember the frame and take into account all forces acting on each member. Solution by the method of virtual work involves a simpler
operation.

the right ␦x is also positive to the
right in the direction of P, so that the
virtual work is P(ϩ␦x). With h positive down ␦h is also mathematically
positive down in the direction of mg,
so that the correct mathematical expression for the work is mg(ϩ␦h).
When we express ␦h in terms of ␦␪ in
the next step, ␦h will have a negative
sign, thus bringing our mathematical
expression into agreement with the
physical observation that the weight
mg does negative work as each center
of mass moves upward with an increase in x and ␪.

ᕢ We obtain ␦h and ␦x with the same
mathematical rules of differentiation
with which we may obtain dh and dx.

Article 7/3

Equilibrium

SAMPLE PROBLEM 7/2

M

The mass m is brought to an equilibrium position by the application of the
couple M to the end of one of the two parallel links which are hinged as shown.
The links have negligible mass, and all friction is assumed to be absent. Determine the expression for the equilibrium angle ␪ assumed by the links with the
vertical for a given value of M. Consider the alternative of a solution by force and
moment equilibrium.

θ

b

M

ϩmg ␦h ϭ mg ␦(b cos ␪ ϩ c)

θ

b

ϭ Ϫmgb sin ␪ ␦␪

m

ᕡ The minus sign shows that the work is negative for a positive value of ␦␪. The
constant c drops out since its variation is zero.
With ␪ measured positive in the clockwise sense, ␦␪ is also positive clockwise. Thus, the work done by the clockwise couple M is ϩM ␦␪. Substitution into
the virtual-work equation gives us

θ
+h

G
mg

Helpful Hint

ᕡ Again, as in Sample Problem 7/1, we
are consistent mathematically with
our deﬁnition of work, and we see
that the algebraic sign of the resulting expression agrees with the physical change.

M ␦␪ ϩ mg ␦h ϭ 0

which yields
M ␦␪ ϭ mgb sin ␪ ␦␪
M
mgb

b

c

ϭ mg(Ϫb sin ␪ ␦␪ ϩ 0)

␪ ϭ sinϪ1

θ

b

G

m

The active-force diagram shows the weight mg acting through the
center of mass G and the couple M applied to the end of the link. There are no
other external active forces or moments which do work on the system during a
change in the angle ␪.
The vertical position of the center of mass G is designated by the distance h
below the ﬁxed horizontal reference line and is h ϭ b cos ␪ ϩ c. The work done
by mg during a movement ␦h in the direction of mg is

Solution.

[␦U ϭ 0]

407

Ans.

Inasmuch as sin ␪ cannot exceed unity, we see that for equilibrium, M is limited
to values that do not exceed mgb.
The advantage of the virtual-work solution for this problem is readily seen
when we observe what would be involved with a solution by force and moment
equilibrium. For the latter approach, it would be necessary for us to draw separate free-body diagrams of all of the three moving parts and account for all of the
internal reactions at the pin connections. To carry out these steps, it would be
necessary for us to include in the analysis the horizontal position of G with respect to the attachment points of the two links, even though reference to this position would ﬁnally drop out of the equations when they were solved. We
conclude, then, that the virtual-work method in this problem deals directly with
cause and effect and avoids reference to irrelevant quantities.

408

Chapter 7

Virtual Work

SAMPLE PROBLEM 7/3

P

For link OA in the horizontal position shown, determine the force P on the
sliding collar which will prevent OA from rotating under the action of the couple
M. Neglect the mass of the moving parts.

B
h
O

y

b

M

A
a

The given sketch serves as the active-force diagram for the system.
All other forces are either internal or nonworking reactive forces due to the constraints.
We will give the crank OA a small clockwise angular movement ␦␪ as our
virtual displacement and determine the resulting virtual work done by M and P.
From the horizontal position of the crank, the angular movement gives a downward displacement of A equal to

x

Solution.

ᕡ

–δ x
B′

δθ
O

a

␦y ϭ a ␦␪
where ␦␪ is, of course, expressed in radians.
From the right triangle for which link AB is the constant hypotenuse we
may write

or

y
␦x ϭ Ϫx ␦y

␦b ϭ 0. Notice the negative sign,
which merely tells us that if one
change is positive, the other must be
negative.

y
␦x ϭ Ϫx a ␦␪
and the virtual-work equation becomes
M ␦␪ ϩ P ␦x ϭ 0
Pϭ

΂

ᕣ We could just as well use a counter-

΃

y
M ␦␪ ϩ P Ϫx a ␦␪ ϭ 0
Mx Mx
ϭ
ha
ya

Helpful Hints

ᕢ The length b is constant so that

Thus,

ᕣ [␦U ϭ 0]

A′

point A would no longer equal ␦y if
the crank OA were not in a horizontal position.

We now take the differential of the equation and get
0 ϭ 2x ␦x ϩ 2y ␦y

aδθ = δ y

A

ᕡ Note that the displacement a ␦␪ of

b2 ϭ x2 ϩ y2

ᕢ

B

Ans.

Again, we observe that the virtual-work method produces a direct relationship between the active force P and the couple M without involving other forces
which are irrelevant to this relationship. Solution by the force and moment
equations of equilibrium, although fairly simple in this problem, would require
accounting for all forces initially and then eliminating the irrelevant ones.

clockwise virtual displacement for
the crank, which would merely reverse the signs of all terms.

Article 7/3

Problems

409

PROBLEMS
(Assume that the negative work of friction is negligible in
the following problems unless otherwise indicated.)

b

Introductory Problems

P
r

7/1 The mass of the uniform bar of length l is m while
that of the uniform bar of length 2l is 2m. For a given
force P, determine the angle ␪ for equilibrium.

l

θ

l
P

l
Problem 7/3

Problem 7/1

7/2 Determine the couple M required to maintain equilibrium at an angle ␪. Each of the two uniform bars has
mass m and length l.

7/4 Determine the vertical force P necessary to maintain
equilibrium of the linkage in the vertical plane at the
␪-position. Each link is a uniform bar with a mass ␳
per unit of length. Show that P is independent of ␪.

b

θ
l/2

2b

M

l
l/2

θ

θ

b
Problem 7/2

7/3 The arbor press works by a rack and pinion and is
used to develop large forces, such as those required to
produce force ﬁts. If the mean radius of the pinion
(gear) is r, determine the force R which can be developed by the press for a given force P on the handle.

P
Problem 7/4

7/5 Each of the uniform links of the frame has a mass m
and a length b. The equilibrium position of the frame
in the vertical plane is determined by the couple M
applied to the left-hand link. Express ␪ in terms of M.

b

M
m
θ

m
θ

Problem 7/5

410

Chapter 7

Virtual Work

7/6 Replace the couple M of Prob. 7/5 by the horizontal
force P as shown and determine the equilibrium
angle ␪.

b
–
2

7/9 The spring of constant k is unstretched when ␪ ϭ 0.
Derive an expression for the force P required to deﬂect the system to an angle ␪. The mass of the bars is
negligible.

b

P

k

b
–
2
A

θ

θ

θ

l

Problem 7/6

7/7 Determine the torque M on the activating lever of the
dump truck necessary to balance the load of mass m
with center of mass at G when the dump angle is ␪.
The polygon ABDC is a parallelogram.

B

θ

P

l

C
Problem 7/9
b

a

G

7/10 By means of a rack-and-pinion mechanism, large
forces can be developed by the cork puller shown. If
the mean radius of the pinion gears is 12 mm, determine the force R which is exerted on the cork for
given forces P on the handles.

θ
D

B
M

A

C

12 mm
Problem 7/7

7/8 Find the force Q exerted on the paper by the paper
punch of Prob. 4/89, repeated here.

70 mm

70 mm

P

P

b
a

a

P

Problem 7/10
P
Problem 7/8

Article 7/3
7/11 What force P is required to hold the segmented 3panel door in the position shown where the middle
panel is in the 45Њ position? Each panel has a mass
m, and friction in the roller guides (shown dashed)
may be neglected.

Problems

411

7/13 Determine the couple M required to maintain equilibrium at an angle ␪. The mass of the uniform bar
of length 2l is 2m, while that of the uniform bar of
length l is m.
l/2

P
l/2
l
θ

2m

Horizontal

l/2
M
m

l/2

45°

Problem 7/13

Representative Problems
Vertical

Problem 7/11

7/12 The upper jaw D of the toggle press slides with negligible frictional resistance along the ﬁxed vertical
column. Determine the required force F on the handle to produce a compression R on the roller E for
any given value of ␪.

7/14 In designing the toggle press shown, n turns of the
worm shaft A would be required to produce one turn
of the worm wheels B which operate the cranks
BD. The movable ram has a mass m. Neglect any friction and determine the torque M on the worm shaft
required to generate a compressive force C in the
press for the position ␪ ϭ 90Њ. (Note that the virtual
displacements of the ram and point D are equal for
the ␪ ϭ 90Њ position.)
M
A

250 m
m

B

θ

A

θ

r

B
D

l

100 m
m

F
B
m
m
100 m

C

D
E

C

Problem 7/14
Problem 7/12

θ

412

Chapter 7

Virtual Work

7/15 The speed reducer shown is designed with a gear
ratio of 40:1. With an input torque M1 ϭ 30 N ⅐ m,
the measured output torque is M2 ϭ 1180 N ⅐ m.
Determine the mechanical efﬁciency e of the unit.

M1

7/17 Each of the four uniform movable bars has a mass
m, and their equilibrium position in the vertical
plane is controlled by the force P applied to the
end of the lower bar. For a given value of P, determine the equilibrium angle ␪. Is it possible for the
equilibrium position shown to be maintained by
replacing the force P by a couple M applied to the
end of the lower horizontal bar?

a

a

M2
θ

θ

2a

2a

P
Problem 7/17

Problem 7/15

7/16 The portable car hoist is operated by the hydraulic cylinder which controls the horizontal
movement of end A of the link in the horizontal
slot. Determine the compression C in the piston
rod of the cylinder to support the load P at a
height h.

7/18 The uniform bar of mass m is held in the inclined
position ␪ by the horizontal force F applied to the
links AB and BC whose masses are negligible. For
the position shown where AB is perpendicular to
AO and BC is perpendicular to the bar, determine F.

P
C
b

L

B
F
h

b

h
b

b
A

O

θ

Problem 7/16
Problem 7/18

A

Article 7/3
7/19 In testing the design of the screw-lift jack shown, 12
turns of the handle are required to elevate the lifting
pad 1 in. If a force F = 10 lb applied normal to the
crank is required to elevate a load L = 2700 lb, determine the efﬁciency e of the screw in raising the load.

Problems

413

7/21 The elevation of the platform of mass m supported
by the four identical links is controlled by the hydraulic cylinders AB and AC which are pivoted at
point A. Determine the compression P in each of the
cylinders required to support the platform for a
speciﬁed angle ␪.

6″
m
θ

L

θ

b

b

F

B

C

b

b

θ

θ

A
b

b

Problem 7/21

Problem 7/19

7/20 Determine the force F which the person must apply
tangent to the rim of the handwheel of a wheelchair
in order to roll up the incline of angle ␪. The combined
mass of the chair and person is m. (If s is the displacement of the center of the wheel measured along the
incline and ␤ the corresponding angle in radians
through which the wheel turns, it is easily shown that
s ϭ R␤ if the wheel rolls without slipping.)

7/22 The cargo box of the food-delivery truck for aircraft
servicing has a loaded mass m and is elevated by the
application of a torque M on the lower end of the
link which is hinged to the truck frame. The horizontal slots allow the linkage to unfold as the cargo
box is elevated. Express M as a function of h.

m
b

b

b

Problem 7/22

R
r

θ
Problem 7/20

b

M

h

414

Chapter 7

Virtual Work

7/23 In the design of the claw for the remote-action actuator, a clamping force C is developed as a result of
the tension P in the control rod. Express C in terms
of P for the conﬁguration shown, where the jaws
are parallel.
b

a

a

c

d

e
C

P

7/25 The figure shows a sectional view of a mechanism
designed for engaging a marine clutch. The position of the conical collar on the shaft is controlled
by the engaging force P, and a slight movement to
the left causes the two levers to bear against the
back side of the clutch plate, which generates a
uniform pressure p over the contact area of the
plate. This area is that of a circular ring with 6-in.
outside and 3-in. inside radii. Determine by the
method of virtual work the force P required to
generate a clutch-plate pressure of 30 lb/in.2. The
clutch plate is free to slide along the collar to
which the levers are pivoted.

C

p

3″
1″

6″

Problem 7/23

7/24 The portable work platform is elevated by means of the
two hydraulic cylinders articulated at points C. Each
cylinder is under a hydraulic pressure p and has a piston area A. Determine the pressure p required to support the platform and show that it is independent of ␪.
The platform, worker, and supplies have a combined
mass m, and the masses of the links may be neglected.

3″
P

p
Problem 7/25

b

b

b
θ

b
B

B

θ

b/2

b/2

b/2
C

C

Problem 7/24

b/2

20°

Article 7/3
7/26 The existing design of an aircraft cargo loader is
under review. The platform AD of the loader is
elevated to the proper height by the mechanism
shown. There are two sets of linkages and hydraulic
lifts, one set on each side. Cables F which lift the
platform are controlled by the hydraulic cylinders E
whose piston rods elevate the pulleys G. If the total
weight of the platform and containers is W, determine the compressive force P in each of the two piston rods. Does P depend on the height h? What force
Q is supported by each link at its center joint when
W is centered between A and D?

b

θ

θ

L
Problem 7/28

F

7/29 Determine the force F between the jaws of the
clamp in terms of a torque M exerted on the handle
of the adjusting screw. The screw has a lead (advancement per revolution) L, and friction is to be
neglected.

e
A

D
l/2

l/2

l/2

l/2

C

E

B
a

D

F

B

2θ

M

b

Problem 7/26

b

7/27 Determine the force P developed at the jaws of the
rivet squeezer.
e

E

A

F

a
A
C

415

b
2b

G

h

Problems

b
a

c
B

Problem 7/29

7/30 Determine the force N exerted on the log by each
jaw of the ﬁreplace tongs shown.

b
F

P
Problem 7/27

N

B

7/28 Express the compression C in the hydraulic cylinder
of the car hoist in terms of the angle ␪. The mass of
the hoist is negligible compared with the mass m of
the vehicle.

D

A

C

N

P
5″

7″

7″

Problem 7/30

8″

416

Chapter 7

Virtual Work

7/31 Each of the uniform identical links has a length l
and a mass m and is subjected to a couple M, one
clockwise and the other counterclockwise, applied as
shown. Determine the angle which each link makes
with the horizontal when the system is in its equilibrium conﬁguration.

θ1

7/33 A power-operated loading platform designed for the
back of a truck is shown in the ﬁgure. The position
of the platform is controlled by the hydraulic cylinder, which applies force at C. The links are pivoted
to the truck frame at A, B, and F. Determine the
force P supplied by the cylinder in order to support
the platform in the position shown. The mass of the
platform and links may be neglected compared with
that of the 250-kg crate with center of mass at G.
250 300
mm mm

M
G

θ2

350 mm

650 mm

D
300
mm

A
500
mm

Problem 7/31

7/32 The antitorque wrench is designed for use by a crew
member of a spacecraft where no stable platform exists against which to push as a bolt is turned. The
pin A ﬁts into an adjacent hole in the space structure
which contains the bolt to be turned. Successive oscillations of the gear and handle unit turn the socket
in one direction through the action of a ratchet
mechanism. The reaction against the pin A provides
the “antitorque” characteristic of the tool. For a
gripping force P = 150 N, determine the torque M
transmitted to the bolt. (One side of the tool is used
for tightening and the other for loosening the bolt.)
40
mm

120 mm

300
mm

B

Problem 7/33

᭤7/34 Determine the force Q at the jaw of the shear for the
400-N force applied with ␪ ϭ 30Њ. (Hint: Replace the
400-N force by a force and a couple at the center of
the small gear. The absolute angular displacement of
the gear must be carefully determined.)

360 mm

P

θ

400 N

B

F
C

M

17.5
mm

E

A

A
300 mm

P

Problem 7/32

360 mm

75 mm

Problem 7/34

Article 7/4

7/4

Potential Energy and Stability

417

Potential Energy and Stability

The previous article treated the equilibrium conﬁguration of mechanical systems composed of individual members which we assumed to
be perfectly rigid. We now extend our method to account for mechanical
systems which include elastic elements in the form of springs. We introduce the concept of potential energy, which is useful for determining the
stability of equilibrium.

Elastic Potential Energy
The work done on an elastic member is stored in the member in the
form of elastic potential energy Ve. This energy is potentially available
to do work on some other body during the relief of its compression or
extension.
Consider a spring, Fig. 7/11, which is being compressed by a force F.
We assume that the spring is elastic and linear, which means that the
force F is directly proportional to the deﬂection x. We write this relation
as F ϭ kx, where k is the spring constant or stiffness of the spring. The
work done on the spring by F during a movement dx is dU ϭ F dx, so
that the elastic potential energy of the spring for a compression x is the
total work done on the spring
Ve ϭ

͵

x

0

F dx ϭ

͵

kx dx

͵

x1

δx

x

0

F2

(7/4)

Thus, the potential energy of the spring equals the triangular area in
the diagram of F versus x from 0 to x.
During an increase in the compression of the spring from x1 to x2, the
work done on the spring equals its change in elastic potential energy or
⌬Ve ϭ

x1
F

1

x2

F1

x

Ve ϭ 2 kx2

or

Uncompressed length

x2
F
F

which equals the trapezoidal area from x1 to x2.
During a virtual displacement ␦x of the spring, the virtual work
done on the spring is the virtual change in elastic potential energy
␦Ve ϭ F ␦x ϭ kx ␦x
During a decrease in the compression of the spring as it is relaxed
from x ϭ x2 to x ϭ x1, the change (ﬁnal minus initial) in the potential energy of the spring is negative. Consequently, if ␦x is negative, ␦Ve is also
negative.
When we have a spring in tension rather than compression, the
work and energy relations are the same as those for compression, where
x now represents the elongation of the spring rather than its compression. While the spring is being stretched, the force again acts in the direction of the displacement, doing positive work on the spring and
increasing its potential energy.

kx

F2
F

kx dx ϭ 1 k(x22 Ϫ x12)
2

=

δ Ve = kx δ x

F1
0
0

x1
x

x2
δx

Figure 7/11

x

418

Chapter 7

Virtual Work

Because the force acting on the movable end of a spring is the negative of the force exerted by the spring on the body to which its movable
end is attached, the work done on the body is the negative of the potential
energy change of the spring.
A torsional spring, which resists the rotation of a shaft or another
element, can also store and release potential energy. If the torsional
stiffness, expressed as torque per radian of twist, is a constant K, and if
␪ is the angle of twist in radians, then the resisting torque is M ϭ K␪.
␪
The potential energy becomes Ve ϭ ͐0 K␪ d␪ or
1

Ve ϭ 2K␪2

(7/4a)

which is analogous to the expression for the linear extension spring.
The units of elastic potential energy are the same as those of work
and are expressed in joules (J) in SI units and in foot-pounds (ft-lb) in
U.S. customary units.

Vg = +Wh

δ U = –W δ h
or
δ Vg = +W δ h

δh

G

W

+h

Datum plane

Vg = 0

+h alternative
G

Vg = –Wh

W

Figure 7/12

Datum 2

G

G

Gravitational Potential Energy
In the previous article we treated the work of a gravitational force
or weight acting on a body in the same way as the work of any other active force. Thus, for an upward displacement ␦h of the body in Fig. 7/12
the weight W ϭ mg does negative work ␦U ϭ Ϫmg ␦h. If, on the other
hand, the body has a downward displacement ␦h, with h measured positive downward, the weight does positive work ␦U ϭ ϩmg ␦h.
An alternative to the foregoing treatment expresses the work done
by gravity in terms of a change in potential energy of the body. This alternative treatment is a useful representation when we describe a mechanical system in terms of its total energy. The gravitational potential
energy Vg of a body is deﬁned as the work done on the body by a force
equal and opposite to the weight in bringing the body to the position
under consideration from some arbitrary datum plane where the potential energy is deﬁned to be zero. The potential energy, then, is the negative of the work done by the weight. When the body is raised, for
example, the work done is converted into energy which is potentially
available, since the body can do work on some other body as it returns
to its original lower position. If we take Vg to be zero at h ϭ 0, Fig. 7/12,
then at a height h above the datum plane, the gravitational potential energy of the body is
Vg ϭ mgh

ΔV = mg Δh
g
h + Δh
Datum 1
G
m
Reference datum

Figure 7/13

h

(7/5)

If the body is a distance h below the datum plane, its gravitational potential energy is Ϫmgh.
Note that the datum plane for zero potential energy is arbitrary because only the change in potential energy matters, and this change is
the same no matter where we place the datum plane. Note also that the
gravitational potential energy is independent of the path followed in arriving at a particular level h. Thus, the body of mass m in Fig. 7/13 has

Article 7/4

the same potential-energy change no matter which path it follows in
going from datum plane 1 to datum plane 2 because ⌬h is the same for
all three paths.
The virtual change in gravitational potential energy is simply
␦Vg ϭ mg ␦h
where ␦h is the upward virtual displacement of the mass center of the
body. If the mass center has a downward virtual displacement, then ␦Vg
is negative.
The units of gravitational potential energy are the same as those for
work and elastic potential energy, joules (J) in SI units and foot-pounds
(ft-lb) in U.S. customary units.

Energy Equation
We saw that the work done by a linear spring on the body to which
its movable end is attached is the negative of the change in the elastic
potential energy of the spring. Also, the work done by the gravitational
force or weight mg is the negative of the change in gravitational potential energy. Therefore, when we apply the virtual-work equation to a
system with springs and with changes in the vertical position of its
members, we may replace the work of the springs and the work of the
weights by the negative of the respective potential energy changes.
We can use these substitutions to write the total virtual work ␦U in
Eq. 7/3 as the sum of the work ␦UЈ done by all active forces, other than
spring forces and weight forces, and the work Ϫ(␦Ve ϩ ␦Vg) done by the
spring and weight forces. Equation 7/3 then becomes
␦UЈ Ϫ (␦Ve ϩ ␦Vg) ϭ 0

or

␦UЈ ϭ ␦V

(7/6)

where V ϭ Ve ϩ Vg stands for the total potential energy of the system.
With this formulation a spring becomes internal to the system, and the
work of spring and gravitational forces is accounted for in the ␦V term.

Active-Force Diagrams
With the method of virtual work it is useful to construct the activeforce diagram of the system you are analyzing. The boundary of the system must clearly distinguish those members which are part of the
system from other bodies which are not part of the system. When we include an elastic member within the boundary of our system, the forces
of interaction between it and the movable members to which it is attached are internal to the system. Thus these forces need not be shown
because their effects are accounted for in the Ve term. Similarly, weight
forces are not shown because their work is accounted for in the Vg term.
Figure 7/14 illustrates the difference between the use of Eqs. 7/3 and
7/6. We consider the body in part a of the ﬁgure to be a particle for simplicity, and we assume that the virtual displacement is along the ﬁxed
path. The particle is in equilibrium under the action of the applied forces
F1 and F2, the gravitational force mg, the spring force kx, and a normal

Potential Energy and Stability

419

420

Chapter 7

Virtual Work

F1
Smooth
path

m

F2
k

(a)
F1

F1
System

m

m
F2

F2

kx
k

mg

Eq. 7/3: δ U = 0
(b)

Eq. 7/6: δ U′ = δ V + δ V = δ V
e
g
(c)

Figure 7/14

reaction force. In Fig 7/14b, where the particle alone is isolated, ␦U includes the virtual work of all forces shown on the active-force diagram of
the particle. (The normal reaction exerted on the particle by the smooth
guide does no work and is omitted.) In Fig. 7/14c the spring is included in
the system, and ␦UЈ is the virtual work of only F1 and F2, which are the
only external forces whose work is not accounted for in the potentialenergy terms. The work of the weight mg is accounted for in the ␦Vg
term, and the work of the spring force is included in the ␦Ve term.

Principle of Virtual Work
Thus, for a mechanical system with elastic members and members
which undergo changes in position, we may restate the principle of virtual work as follows:
The virtual work done by all external active forces (other
than the gravitational and spring forces accounted for in
the potential energy terms) on a mechanical system in
equilibrium equals the corresponding change in the total
elastic and gravitational potential energy of the system
for any and all virtual displacements consistent with the
constraints.

Article 7/4

Stability of Equilibrium
Consider now the case of a mechanical system where movement is
accompanied by changes in gravitational and elastic potential energies
and where no work is done on the system by nonpotential forces. The
mechanism treated in Sample Problem 7/6 is an example of such a system. With ␦UЈ ϭ 0 the virtual-work relation, Eq. 7/6, becomes
␦(Ve ϩ Vg) ϭ 0

or

␦V ϭ 0

(7/7)

Equation 7/7 expresses the requirement that the equilibrium conﬁguration of a mechanical system is one for which the total potential energy V
of the system has a stationary value. For a system of one degree of freedom where the potential energy and its derivatives are continuous functions of the single variable, say, x, which describes the conﬁguration, the
equilibrium condition ␦V ϭ 0 is equivalent mathematically to the
requirement
dV
ϭ0
dx

(7/8)

Equation 7/8 states that a mechanical system is in equilibrium when the
derivative of its total potential energy is zero. For systems with several
degrees of freedom the partial derivative of V with respect to each coordinate in turn must be zero for equilibrium.*
There are three conditions under which Eq. 7/8 applies, namely,
when the total potential energy is a minimum (stable equilibrium), a
maximum (unstable equilibrium), or a constant (neutral equilibrium).
Figure 7/15 shows a simple example of these three conditions. The potential energy of the roller is clearly a minimum in the stable position, a
maximum in the unstable position, and a constant in the neutral
position.
We may also characterize the stability of a mechanical system by
noting that a small displacement away from the stable position results
in an increase in potential energy and a tendency to return to the position of lower energy. On the other hand, a small displacement away
from the unstable position results in a decrease in potential energy and

Stable

Unstable

Neutral

Figure 7/15

*For examples of two-degree-of-freedom systems, see Art. 43, Chapter 7, of the ﬁrst author’s Statics, 2nd Edition, SI Version, 1975.

Potential Energy and Stability

421

Chapter 7

Virtual Work

a tendency to move farther away from the equilibrium position to one of
still lower energy. For the neutral position a small displacement one
way or the other results in no change in potential energy and no tendency to move either way.
When a function and its derivatives are continuous, the second derivative is positive at a point of minimum value of the function and
negative at a point of maximum value of the function. Thus, the mathematical conditions for equilibrium and stability of a system with a single
degree of freedom x are:
Equilibrium

dV
ϭ0
dx

Stable

d2V
Ͼ0
dx2

Unstable

d2 V
Ͻ0
dx2

(7/9)

The second derivative of V may also be zero at the equilibrium position,
in which case we must examine the sign of a higher derivative to ascertain the type of equilibrium. When the order of the lowest remaining
nonzero derivative is even, the equilibrium will be stable or unstable according to whether the sign of this derivative is positive or negative. If
the order of the derivative is odd, the equilibrium is classiﬁed as unstable, and the plot of V versus x for this case appears as an inﬂection point
in the curve with zero slope at the equilibrium value.
Stability criteria for multiple degrees of freedom require more advanced treatment. For two degrees of freedom, for example, we use a
Taylor-series expansion for two variables.

© Media Bakery

422

These lift platforms are examples of the type of
structure which can be most easily analyzed with
a virtual-work approach.

Article 7/4

Potential Energy and Stability

423

SAMPLE PROBLEM 7/4
The 10-kg cylinder is suspended by the spring, which has a stiffness of 2
kN/m. Plot the potential energy V of the system and show that it is minimum at
the equilibrium position.

k = 2 kN/m

V=0

(Although the equilibrium position in this simple problem is clearly
where the force in the spring equals the weight mg, we will proceed as though
this fact were unknown in order to illustrate the energy relationships in the simplest way.) We choose the datum plane for zero potential energy at the position
ᕡ where the spring is unextended.
1
The elastic potential energy for an arbitrary position x is Ve ϭ 2 kx2 and the
gravitational potential energy is Ϫmgx, so that the total potential energy is

+x

Solution.

1
V ϭ 2 kx2 Ϫ mgx

[V ϭ Ve ϩ Vg]

΄

΅

dV
ϭ kx Ϫ mg ϭ 0
dx

x ϭ mg/k

0.049
0

0.02

0.04 0.06
x = mg/k

0.08

x, m
0.10

–2
V = V + Vg
e
–4

V ϭ 1(2000)x2 Ϫ 10(9.81)x
2

–6

expressed in joules, and the equilibrium value of x is
or

Ve = 1 kx2
–
2

4
V, J
2

Although we know in this simple case that the equilibrium is stable, we
prove it by evaluating the sign of the second derivative of V at the equilibrium
position. Thus, d2V/dx2 ϭ k, which is positive, proving that the equilibrium is
stable.
Substituting numerical values gives

x ϭ 10(9.81)/2000 ϭ 0.0490 m

8
6

Equilibrium occurs where
dV
ϭ0
dx

m = 10 kg

49.0 mm

Ans.

Vg = –mgx

–8

We calculate V for various values of x and plot V versus x as shown. The

ᕢ minimum value of V occurs at x ϭ 0.0490 m where dV/dx ϭ 0 and d 2V/dx2 is
positive.

Helpful Hints

ᕡ The choice is arbitrary but simpliﬁes
the algebra.

ᕢ We could have chosen different
datum planes for Ve and Vg without
affecting our conclusions. Such a
change would merely shift the separate curves for Ve and Vg up or down
but would not affect the position of
the minimum value of V.

424

Chapter 7

Virtual Work

SAMPLE PROBLEM 7/5
The two uniform links, each of mass m, are in the vertical plane and are
connected and constrained as shown. As the angle ␪ between the links increases
with the application of the horizontal force P, the light rod, which is connected
at A and passes through a pivoted collar at B, compresses the spring of stiffness
k. If the spring is uncompressed in the position where ␪ ϭ 0, determine the force
P which will produce equilibrium at the angle ␪.

V =0
g

O
b

b

k
A
B
b

The given sketch serves as the active-force diagram of the system.
The compression x of the spring is the distance which A has moved away from B,
which is x ϭ 2b sin ␪/2. Thus, the elastic potential energy of the spring is

Solution.

΂

[Ve ϭ 1 kx2]
2

1
Ve ϭ 2k 2b sin

␪
2

΃

2

ϭ 2kb2 sin2

␪
2

With the datum for zero gravitational potential energy taken through the
support at O for convenience, the expression for Vg becomes

΂

[Vg ϭ mgh]

Vg ϭ 2mg Ϫb cos

␪
2

΃

The distance between O and C is 4b sin ␪/2, so that the virtual work done by
P is

΂

␦UЈ ϭ P ␦ 4b sin

΃

␪
␪
ϭ 2Pb cos ␦␪
2
2

The virtual-work equation now gives

[␦UЈ ϭ ␦Ve ϩ ␦Vg]
2Pb cos

΂

΃ ΂

␪
␪
␪
␦␪ ϭ ␦ 2kb2 sin2
ϩ ␦ Ϫ2mgb cos
2
2
2

΃

ϭ 2kb2 sin

␪
␪
␪
cos ␦␪ ϩ mgb sin ␦␪
2
2
2

P ϭ kb sin

␪ 1
␪
ϩ mg tan
2 2
2

Simplifying gives ﬁnally
Ans.

If we had been asked to express the equilibrium value of ␪ corresponding to
a given force P, we would have difﬁculty solving explicitly for ␪ in this particular
case. But for a numerical problem we could resort to a computer solution and
graphical plot of numerical values of the sum of the two functions of ␪ to determine the value of ␪ for which the sum equals P.

P
C

θ

b

Article 7/4

Potential Energy and Stability

SAMPLE PROBLEM 7/6

425

y

The ends of the uniform bar of mass m slide freely in the horizontal and
vertical guides. Examine the stability conditions for the positions of equilibrium.
The spring of stiffness k is undeformed when x ϭ 0.

The system consists of the spring and the bar. Since there are no exᕡ ternal active forces, the given sketch serves as the active-force diagram. We will
take the x-axis as the datum for zero gravitational potential energy. In the displaced position the elastic and gravitational potential energies are

b

Solution.

Ve ϭ 1kx2 ϭ 1kb2 sin2 ␪
2
2

Vg ϭ mg

and

θ

x

b
cos ␪
2

x

The total potential energy is then

k

Helpful Hints

V ϭ Ve ϩ Vg ϭ 1kb2 sin2 ␪ ϩ 1mgb cos ␪
2
2

ᕡ With no external active forces there
is no ␦UЈ term, and ␦V ϭ 0 is equivalent to dV/d␪ ϭ 0.

Equilibrium occurs for dV/d␪ ϭ 0 so that
dV
ϭ kb2 sin ␪ cos ␪ Ϫ 1mgb sin ␪ ϭ (kb2 cos ␪ Ϫ 1mgb) sin ␪ ϭ 0
2
2
d␪
The two solutions to this equation are given by

ᕢ

sin ␪ ϭ 0

cos ␪ ϭ

and

mg
2kb

ᕢ Be careful not to overlook the solution ␪ ϭ 0 given by sin ␪ ϭ 0.

We now determine the stability by examining the sign of the second derivative of V for each of the two equilibrium positions. The second derivative is
d2V
ϭ kb2(cos2 ␪ Ϫ sin2 ␪) Ϫ 1mgb cos ␪
2
d␪2
ϭ kb2(2 cos2 ␪ Ϫ 1) Ϫ 1mgb cos ␪
2

Solution I.

sin ␪ ϭ 0, ␪ ϭ 0

΂

mg
d 2V
ϭ kb2(2 Ϫ 1) Ϫ 1mgb ϭ kb2 1 Ϫ
2
d␪2
2kb

΃

ϭ positive (stable)

if k Ͼ mg/2b

ϭ negative (unstable)

if k Ͻ mg/2b

Ans.

Thus, if the spring is sufﬁciently stiff, the bar will return to the vertical position

ᕣ even though there is no force in the spring at that position.
Solution II.

cos ␪ ϭ

result without the mathematical
analysis of the stability.

mg
mg
, ␪ ϭ cosϪ1
2kb
2kb

΄ ΂ ΃ Ϫ 1΅ Ϫ

mg
d2V
ϭ kb2 2
2kb
d␪2

2

mg
΂ ΃ ϭ kb ΄΂2kb΃

mg
1
2 mgb 2kb

2

ᕣ We might not have anticipated this

2

΅

Ϫ1

Ans.

Since the cosine must be less than unity, we see that this solution is limited to
the case where k Ͼ mg/2b, which makes the second derivative of V negative.
ᕤ Thus, equilibrium for Solution II is never stable. If k Ͻ mg/2b, we no longer have
Solution II since the spring will be too weak to maintain equilibrium at a value
of ␪ between 0 and 90Њ.

ᕤ Again, without the beneﬁt of the
mathematical analysis of the stability
we might have supposed erroneously
that the bar could come to rest in a
stable equilibrium position for some
value of ␪ between 0 and 90Њ.

426

Chapter 7

Virtual Work

PROBLEMS
(Assume that the negative work of friction is negligible in
the following problems.)

Introductory Problems
7/35 The potential energy of a mechanical system is
given by V ϭ 6x4 Ϫ 3x2 ϩ 5, where x is the position
coordinate which deﬁnes the conﬁguration of the
single-degree-of-freedom system. Determine the
equilibrium values of x and the stability condition
of each.
7/36 For the mechanism shown the spring is uncompressed when ␪ ϭ 0. Determine the angle ␪ for the
equilibrium position and specify the minimum
spring stiffness k which will limit ␪ to 30Њ. The rod
DE passes freely through the pivoted collar C, and
the cylinder of mass m slides freely on the ﬁxed vertical shaft.

7/37 The uniform bar of mass m and length L is supported in the vertical plane by two identical springs
each of stiffness k and compressed a distance ␦ in
the vertical position ␪ ϭ 0. Determine the minimum
stiffness k which will ensure a stable equilibrium
position with ␪ ϭ 0. The springs may be assumed to
act in the horizontal direction during small angular
motion of the bar.
Vertical

θ

k

k

L

Problem 7/37
C

D

k
E

m
b
b

B

θ

7/38 The uniform bar of mass m and length l is hinged
about a horizontal axis through its end O and is attached to a torsional spring which exerts a torque
M ϭ K␪ on the rod, where K is the torsional stiffness of the spring in units of torque per radian and
␪ is the angular deﬂection from the vertical in radians. Determine the maximum value of l for which
equilibrium at the position ␪ ϭ 0 is stable.

b

A

θ
l

Problem 7/36

O

Problem 7/38

Article 7/4
7/39 The small cylinder of mass m and radius r is conﬁned to roll on the circular surface of radius R. By
the methods of this article, prove that the cylinder
is unstable in case (a) and stable in case (b).

Problems

427

A

b

θ

O

r

C

F

b

θ

θ

k

R

E

D

r

R

G

B

M
(a)

Problem 7/41

(b)
Problem 7/39

7/40 Determine the equilibrium value of x for the springsupported bar. The spring has a stiffness k and is
unstretched when x ϭ 0. The force F acts in the
direction of the bar, and the mass of the bar is
negligible.

7/42 The cylinder of mass M and radius R rolls without
slipping on the circular surface of radius 3R. Attached to the cylinder is a small body of mass m. Determine the required relationship between M and m
if the body is to be stable in the equilibrium position
shown.

F

3R
m

R/4
3R/4

M

h
k

x

Problem 7/42

7/43 Two identical bars are welded at a 120Њ angle and
pivoted at O as shown. The mass of the support tab
is small compared with the mass of the bars. Investigate the stability of the equilibrium position shown.

Problem 7/40

7/41 In the mechanism shown the rod AB slides through
the pivoted collar at O and compresses the spring
when the couple M is applied to link GF to increase
the angle ␪. The spring has a stiffness k and would
be uncompressed in the position ␪ ϭ 0. Determine
the angle ␪ for equilibrium. The weights of the links
are negligible. Figure CDEF is a parallelogram.

L

L
—
5

O

30°

30°
Problem 7/43

428

Chapter 7

Virtual Work

7/44 Each of the two gears carries an eccentric mass m
and is free to rotate in the vertical plane about its
bearing. Determine the values of ␪ for equilibrium and identify the type of equilibrium for each
position.
θ
2θ

G1
2a

2r

7/46 One of the critical requirements in the design of an
artiﬁcial leg for an amputee is to prevent the knee
joint from buckling under load when the leg is
straight. As a ﬁrst approximation, simulate the artiﬁcial leg by the two light links with a torsion spring
at their common joint. The spring develops a torque
M ϭ K␤, which is proportional to the angle of bend ␤
at the joint. Determine the minimum value of K
which will ensure stability of the knee joint for ␤ ϭ 0.

G2

r
a

m

β
l
Problem 7/44

7/45 For the mechanism shown, the spring of stiffness k
has an unstretched length of essentially zero, and
the larger link has a mass m with mass center at B.
The mass of the smaller link is negligible. Determine the equilibrium angle ␪ for a given downward
force P.

P

Problem 7/46

Representative Problems
7/47 The handle is fastened to one of the spring-connected
gears, which are mounted in ﬁxed bearings. The
spring of stiffness k connects two pins mounted in
the faces of the gears. When the handle is in the
vertical position, ␪ ϭ 0 and the spring force is zero.
Determine the force P required to maintain equilibrium at an angle ␪.

k

b

b

l

θ

B
b

a

A
P
Problem 7/45

r

θ

b
k

r

θ

Problem 7/47

b

Article 7/4
7/48 The ﬁgure shows the edge view OA of a uniform
ventilator door of mass m which closes the opening
OC in a vertical wall. The spring of stiffness k is uncompressed when ␪ ϭ 0, and the light rod which
conﬁnes it passes through the pivoted collar C. With
this design show that the door will remain in equilibrium for any angle ␪ if the spring has the proper
stiffness k.

Problems

429

7/50 In the mechanism shown, rod AC slides through the
pivoted collar at B and compresses the spring when
the couple M is applied to link DE. The spring has a
stiffness k and is uncompressed for the position
␪ ϭ 0. Determine the angle ␪ for equilibrium. The
masses of the parts are negligible.
C

k

k

C

B
A

b

E

M

a

A
θ

c

b

b
a
b

b
D

θ
O

Problem 7/50

Problem 7/48

7/49 Determine the maximum height h of the mass m for
which the inverted pendulum will be stable in the
vertical position shown. Each of the springs has a
stiffness k, and they have equal precompressions in
this position. Neglect the mass of the remainder of
the mechanism.

7/51 In the ﬁgure is shown a small industrial lift with a
foot release. There are four identical springs, two on
each side of the central shaft. The stiffness of each
pair of springs is 2k. In designing the lift specify
the value of k which will ensure stable equilibrium
when the lift supports a load (weight) L in the position where ␪ ϭ 0 with no force P on the pedal. The
springs are equally precompressed initially and may
be assumed to act in the horizontal direction at all
times.
L

m

h
l

2k
k

2k

k
b

b

P

l

Problem 7/49

Problem 7/51

θ

430

Chapter 7

Virtual Work

7/52 The cross section of a trap door hinged at A and
having a mass m and a center of mass at G is shown
in the ﬁgure. The spring is compressed by the rod
which is pinned to the lower end of the door and
which passes through the swivel block at B. When
␪ ϭ 0, the spring is undeformed. Show that with the
proper stiffness k of the spring, the door will be in
equilibrium for any angle ␪.
b
a

7/54 The inverted pendulum of mass m and mass center
G is supported by the two springs, each of stiffness
k. If the springs are equally stretched when the pendulum is in the vertical position shown, determine
the positions of static equilibrium and investigate
the stability of the system at each position. Take the
springs to be sufﬁciently long so that they remain
effectively horizontal.

G
m

θ A

G

a
B

L/2
k

k

k

L/2
Problem 7/52
O

7/53 One end of the torsion spring is secured to the
ground at A, and the other end is fastened to the
shaft at B. The torsional stiffness K of the elastic
spring is the torque required to twist the spring
through an angle of one radian. The spring resists
the moment about the shaft axis caused by the tension mg in the cable wrapped around the drum of
radius r. Determine the equilibrium value of h measured from the dashed position, where the spring is
untwisted.

Problem 7/54

7/55 The 3-lb pendulum swings about axis O-O and has
a mass center at G. When ␪ ϭ 0, each spring has
an initial stretch of 4 in. Calculate the maximum
stiffness k of each of the parallel springs which will
allow the pendulum to be in stable equilibrium at
the bottom position ␪ ϭ 0.

B

A

z
K

r

k
h
k

O

20″

m
O
Problem 7/53
20″

G
10″

θ
Problem 7/55

Article 7/4
7/56 The cylinder of mass m and radius r rolls without
slipping on the circular surface of radius ␳. Attached
to the cylinder is a small body of mass m/4. Determine the maximum value of ␳ for which the body is
stable in the equilibrium position shown.

ρ

m
—
4
r
m

Problems

᭤ 7/58 The portable roller stand for supporting boards
ejected from a wood planer is designed with a microﬁne height adjustment produced by turning the
knurled knob of the adjusting screw with a torque
M. The single-thread screw with square threads
has a pitch p (advancement per revolution) and is
threaded into the collar at B to control the distance
between A and B (and hence C and D). The roller E
and supporting box have a mass m1, and the four
uniform links (two on each side) have a combined
mass m2 and a length 2b for each. Neglect all friction and ﬁnd the torque M necessary to raise the
roller for a given value of ␪.
E

E

D

Problem 7/56

7/57 The solid hemisphere of diameter 2b and concentric
cylindrical knob of diameter b are resting on a horizontal surface. Determine the maximum height h
which the knob may have without causing the unit
to be unstable in the upright position shown. Both
parts are made from the same material.

431

C
b

θ
θ

O
b

b

Partial
end view

b

A

B

M
Problem 7/58

b
h
2b

Problem 7/57

᭤ 7/59 The uniform garage door AB shown in section has a
mass m and is equipped with two of the springloaded mechanisms shown, one on each side of the
door. The arm OB has negligible mass, and the
upper corner A of the door is free to move horizontally on a roller. The unstretched length of the
spring is r Ϫ a, so that in the top position with
␪ ϭ ␲ the spring force is zero. To ensure smooth action of the door as it reaches the vertical closed position ␪ ϭ 0, it is desirable that the door be insensitive
to movement in this position. Determine the spring
stiffness k required for this design.

A

h = 2r

a
O θ
r
B

Problem 7/59

432

Chapter 7

Virtual Work

᭤ 7/60 The double-axle front suspension is used on small
trucks. In a test of the designed action, the frame F
must be jacked up so that h ϭ 350 mm in order to
relieve the compression in the coil springs. Determine the value of h when the jack is removed. Each
spring has a stiffness of 120 kN/m. The load L is
12 kN, and the central frame F has a mass of 40 kg.
Each wheel and attached link has a mass of 35 kg
with a center of mass 680 mm from the vertical
centerline.

500 mm
L

F

A
h

400 mm

750 mm
Problem 7/60

Article 7/5

7/5

Chapter Review

In this chapter we have developed the principle of virtual work.
This principle is useful for determining the possible equilibrium conﬁgurations of a body or a system of interconnected bodies where the external forces are known. To apply the method successfully, you must
understand the concepts of virtual displacement, degrees of freedom,
and potential energy.

Method of Virtual Work
When various conﬁgurations are possible for a body or a system of
interconnected bodies under the action of applied forces, we can ﬁnd the
equilibrium position by applying the principle of virtual work. When
using this method, keep the following in mind.
1. The only forces which need to be considered when determining the
equilibrium position are those which do work (active forces) during
the assumed differential movement of the body or system away
from its equilibrium position.
2. Those external forces which do no work (reactive forces) need not
be involved.
3. For this reason the active-force diagram of the body or system
(rather than the free-body diagram) is useful to focus attention on
only those external forces which do work during the virtual
displacements.

Virtual Displacements
A virtual displacement is a ﬁrst-order differential change in a linear
or angular position. This change is ﬁctitious in that it is an assumed
movement which need not take place in reality. Mathematically, a virtual displacement is treated the same as a differential change in an actual movement. We use the symbol ␦ for the differential virtual change
and the usual symbol d for the differential change in a real movement.
Relating the linear and angular virtual displacements of the parts of
a mechanical system during a virtual movement consistent with the
constraints is often the most difﬁcult part of the analysis. To do this,
1. Write the geometric relationships which describe the conﬁguration
of the system.
2. Establish the differential changes in the positions of parts of the
system by differentiating the geometric relationship to obtain expressions for the differential virtual movements.

Degrees of Freedom
In Chapter 7 we have restricted our attention to mechanical systems for which the positions of the members can be speciﬁed by a single
variable (single-degree-of-freedom systems). For two or more degrees of

Chapter Review

433

434

Chapter 7

Virtual Work

freedom, we would apply the virtual-work equation as many times as
there are degrees of freedom, allowing one variable to change at a time
while holding the remaining ones constant.

Potential Energy Method
The concept of potential energy, both gravitational (Vg) and elastic
(Ve), is useful in solving equilibrium problems where virtual displacements cause changes in the vertical positions of the mass centers of the
bodies and changes in the lengths of elastic members (springs). To apply
this method,
1. Obtain an expression for the total potential energy V of the system
in terms of the variable which speciﬁes the possible position of the
system.
2. Examine the ﬁrst and second derivatives of V to establish, respectively, the position of equilibrium and the corresponding stability
condition.

Article 7/5

Review Problems

435

REVIEW PROBLEMS
7/61 A control mechanism consists of an input shaft at A
which is turned by applying a couple M and an output slider B which moves in the x-direction against
the action of force P. The mechanism is designed so
that the linear movement of B is proportional to the
angular movement of A, with x increasing 60 mm for
every complete turn of A. If M ϭ 10 N ⅐ m, determine
P for equilibrium. Neglect internal friction and
assume that all mechanical components are ideally
connected rigid bodies.
θ

O
h

O
r

Problem 7/63

M

A

7/64 A uniform rectangular block of height h and mass m
is centered in a horizontal position on the ﬁxed circular surface of radius r. Determine the limiting
value of h for stability.

x
B
P

h

G

Problem 7/61
r

7/62 Neglect the mass of the crossed links and determine
the angle ␪ for the equilibrium position of the symmetrical mechanism in the vertical plane. Each of
the identical rectangular blocks of mass m is homogeneous with mass center at G. Evaluate ␪ for equilibrium when b ϭ a.

a

a
b

a

a

a

G

θ

a

a

a

b

G

Problem 7/64

7/65 The sketch shows the approximate design conﬁguration of one of the four toggle-action hold-down assemblies which clamp the base ﬂange of a rocket
vehicle to the pedestal of its platform prior to
launching. Calculate the preset clamping force F at
A if the link CE is under tension produced by a ﬂuid
pressure of 2000 lb /in.2 acting on the left side of the
piston in the hydraulic cylinder. The piston has a net
area of 16 in.2. The weight of the assembly is considerable, but it is small compared with the clamping
force produced and is therefore neglected here.
20″

60″

Problem 7/62
6″

7/63 The semicylindrical shell of radius r is pivoted about
a shaft through points O as shown. The mass of the
two support tabs is small compared with the mass of
the shell. Determine the maximum value of h for
which equilibrium in the position shown is stable.

Rocket
base flange

A

B
O

40″
E

C
2″
D

Problem 7/65

40″

436

Chapter 7

Virtual Work

7/66 Identify which of the problems (a) through (f ) are
best solved (A) by the force and moment equilibrium
equations and (B) by virtual work. Outline brieﬂy
the procedure for each solution.

h

Plane of each figure is vertical. Size and mass of each
member and applied force are known.
A

r

A

θ

Problem 7/67
P

B

Find θ for equilibrium
(a)

P

B

7/68 Use the principle of virtual work to determine the
minimum coefﬁcient of friction ␮s between the 40-kg
crate and the grips of the symmetrical friction tongs
so that the crate will not slip. Solve for the case
where ␪ ϭ 30Њ.

Find reactions at A and B
(b)
C

P

P
A

A

B

60

m

x
Find x for equilibrium
(c)

0m

m
00

Find forces at A, B, and C
(d)

m

6

θ
θ

B

60

0m

0

m

60

mm

θ
θ

F

C
CD = CE = 400 mm

k
k
E

P

D

x
Find x for equilibrium

θ

40 kg

(e)
Determine maximum
k for stable equilibrium
at θ = 0
(f )
Problem 7/66

7/67 The ﬁgure shows the cross section of a container
composed of a hemispherical shell of radius r and a
cylindrical shell of height h, both made from the
same material. Specify the limitation of h for stability in the upright position when the container is
placed on the horizontal surface.

Problem 7/68

7/69 Determine the equilibrium values of ␪ and the stability of equilibrium at each position for the unbalanced
wheel on the 10Њ incline. Static friction is sufﬁcient to
prevent slipping. The mass center is at G.

O
r

–
θ r

r = 100 mm
– = 60 mm
r

G

C

A
10°

Problem 7/69

Article 7/5
7/70 The ﬁgure shows the design of the cross section of a
135-kg overhead industrial door with hinged segments which pass over the rollers on the cylindrical
guide. When the door is closed, the end A is at position B. On each side of the door there is a control
cable fastened to the bottom of the door and wound
around a drum C. Each of the two drums is connected to a torsion spring, which offers a torsional
resistance which increases by 10 N ⅐ m for each revolution of the drum, starting from an unwound position of the spring where x ϭ 0. Determine the
designed value of x for equilibrium and prove that
equilibrium in this position is stable.
C

Review Problems

437

᭤7/72 The platform of mass m is supported by equal legs
and braced by the two springs as shown. If the
masses of the legs and springs are negligible, design
the springs by determining the minimum stiffness k
of each spring which will ensure stability of the platform in the position shown. Each spring has a preset
deﬂection equal to zero.
m

b

b
k

k

80 mm

l

0.
6

A

m

B

Problem 7/72

x
2.5 m

᭤7/73 In the mechanism shown the spring of stiffness k is
uncompressed when ␪ ϭ 60Њ. Also the masses of the
parts are small compared with the sum m of the
masses of the two cylinders. The mechanism is constructed so that the arms may swing past the vertical, as seen in the right-hand side view. Determine
the values ␪ for equilibrium and investigate the stability of the mechanism in each position. Neglect
friction.

Problem 7/70

7/71 The uniform aluminum disk of radius R and mass m
rolls without slipping on the ﬁxed circular surface of
radius 2R. Fastened to the disk is a lead cylinder
also of mass m with its center located a distance b
from the center O of the disk. Determine the minimum value of b for which the disk will remain in stable equilibrium on the cylindrical surface in the top
position shown.
m
O
R
m

O

a

θ

A

a

a
m

B
k

m
––
2

b

2R

Problem 7/71

Problem 7/73

m
––
2

438

Chapter 7

Virtual Work

*Computer-Oriented Problems
*7/74 Determine the equilibrium value for the coordinate
x for the mechanism under the action of the 60-N
force applied normal to the light bar. The spring has
a stiffness of 1.6 kN /m and is unstretched when
x ϭ 0. (Hint: Replace the applied force by a force–
couple system at point B.)

*7/77 The bar OA, which weighs 50 lb with center of gravity of G, is pivoted about its end O and swings in the
vertical plane under the constraint of the 20-lb counterweight. Write the expression for the total potential energy of the system, taking Vg ϭ 0 when ␪ ϭ 0,
and compute Vg as a function of ␪ from ␪ ϭ 0 to
␪ ϭ 360Њ. From your plot of the results, determine
the position or positions of equilibrium and the stability of equilibrium at each position.
2′

15
0

O

m
m

60 N

θ

k = 1.6 kN/m

2′
B

3′

0

15

G

m

m
A

20 lb

x

Problem 7/77

Problem 7/74

*7/75 The end rollers of the uniform 20-lb bar AB move
freely in the horizontal and vertical guides as shown.
Determine the lowest value of the equilibrium position ␪ under the action of the 480-lb-in. couple M and
the spring of stiffness k ϭ 1.25 lb /in. The spring is
uncompressed when ␪ ϭ 0.

*7/78 The uniform 25-kg trap door is freely hinged along its
bottom edge O–O and is attached to the two springs
each of stiffness k ϭ 800 N /m. The springs are unstretched when ␪ ϭ 90Њ. Take Vg ϭ 0 on the horizontal plane through O–O and plot the potential energy
V ϭ Vg ϩ Ve as a function of ␪ from ␪ ϭ 0 to ␪ ϭ 90Њ.
Also determine the angle ␪ for equilibrium and determine the stability of this position.
D

k = 1.25 lb/in.
B
M = 480 lb-in.

θ

θ

k

m

0m
60

24″
A

k

B

O
600 mm

O 600
mm

Problem 7/75

*7/76 Compute the total potential energy V ϭ Ve ϩ Vg for
the industrial door of Prob. 7/70 in terms of x and
verify the results cited for that problem. Take Vg ϭ 0
through A. Note that the potential energy of the
portion of the door in contact with the cylindrical
guide is a constant, which may be taken as zero for
convenience.

Problem 7/78

A

C

Article 7/5
* 7/79 Determine the equilibrium angle ␪ for the mechanism shown. The spring of stiffness k ϭ 12 lb /in. has
an unstretched length of 8 in. Each of the uniform
links AB and CD has a weight of 10 lb, and member
BD with its load weighs 100 lb. Motion is in the vertical plane.
D

″
16
C

Review Problems

* 7/80 To evaluate the design action of the clamp, determine and plot the ratio of the clamping force R to
the force P on the handle of the clamp as a function
of ␪ for the range 1Њ Յ ␪ Յ 10Њ. The dimensions are
L = 200 mm, b = 80 mm (r ϭ bΊ2), and d = 150 mm.
The diagrams on the right show the geometry relating the small counterclockwise rotation ␦␣ of the
handle and the corresponding small clockwise rotation ␦␤ of ACD. Pin B on the handle moves through
the distance r ␦␣, and a point on ACD coincident
with B moves through the distance b ␦␤.

16″
k=

16″

100 lb
12
lb/
in.

π –θ
4

θ

P
r δα

b δβ

B
θ

″
16

D

B

θ

r δα

L

A

b

δβ
C

b

B
b

r

A
Problem 7/79

439

O

r

A

δα

b
45°
O

d
Problem 7/80

bδβ

This page intentionally left blank

Area Moments
of Inertia

A

APPENDIX OUTLINE
A/1 Introduction
A/2 Deﬁnitions
A/3 Composite Areas
A/4 Products of Inertia and Rotation of Axes

A/1

Introduction

When forces are distributed continuously over an area on which
they act, it is often necessary to calculate the moment of these forces
about some axis either in or perpendicular to the plane of the area. Frequently the intensity of the force (pressure or stress) is proportional to
the distance of the line of action of the force from the moment axis. The
elemental force acting on an element of area, then, is proportional to
distance times differential area, and the elemental moment is proportional to distance squared times differential area. We see, therefore,
that the total moment involves an integral of form ͐ (distance)2 d (area).
This integral is called the moment of inertia or the second moment of the
area. The integral is a function of the geometry of the area and occurs
frequently in the applications of mechanics. Thus it is useful to develop
its properties in some detail and to have these properties available for
ready use when the integral arises.
Figure A/1 illustrates the physical origin of these integrals. In part a
of the ﬁgure, the surface area ABCD is subjected to a distributed pressure p whose intensity is proportional to the distance y from the axis
AB. This situation was treated in Art. 5/9 of Chapter 5, where we described the action of liquid pressure on a plane surface. The moment
about AB due to the pressure on the element of area dA is py dA ϭ
ky2 dA. Thus, the integral in question appears when the total moment
M ϭ k ͐ y2 dA is evaluated.

441

442

Appendix A

Area Moments of Inertia

In Fig. A/1b we show the distribution of stress acting on a transverse section of a simple elastic beam bent by equal and opposite couples
applied to its ends. At any section of the beam, a linear distribution of
force intensity or stress ␴, given by ␴ ϭ ky, is present. The stress is positive (tensile) below the axis O–O and negative (compressive) above the
axis. We see that the elemental moment about the axis O–O is dM ϭ
y(␴ dA) ϭ ky2 dA. Thus, the same integral appears when the total moment M ϭ k ͐ y2 dA is evaluated.
A third example is given in Fig. A/1c, which shows a circular shaft
subjected to a twist or torsional moment. Within the elastic limit of the
material, this moment is resisted at each cross section of the shaft by a
distribution of tangential or shear stress ␶, which is proportional to the
radial distance r from the center. Thus, ␶ ϭ kr, and the total moment
about the central axis is M ϭ ͐ r(␶ dA) ϭ k ͐ r2 dA. Here the integral differs from that in the preceding two examples in that the area is normal
instead of parallel to the moment axis and in that r is a radial coordinate
instead of a rectangular one.
Although the integral illustrated in the preceding examples is generally called the moment of inertia of the area about the axis in question,
a more ﬁtting term is the second moment of area, since the ﬁrst moment
y dA is multiplied by the moment arm y to obtain the second moment
for the element dA. The word inertia appears in the terminology by reason of the similarity between the mathematical form of the integrals for
second moments of areas and those for the resultant moments of the socalled inertia forces in the case of rotating bodies. The moment of inertia of an area is a purely mathematical property of the area and in itself
has no physical signiﬁcance.

A

B

dA

y
D
p = ky
C
(a)

O
dA
O y

σ = ky

(b)

τ = kr

O
dA

A/2

r
O

Deﬁnitions

The following deﬁnitions form the basis for the analysis of area moments of inertia.

Rectangular and Polar Moments of Inertia
Consider the area A in the x-y plane, Fig. A/2. The moments of inertia of the element dA about the x- and y-axes are, by definition, dIx ϭ
y2 dA and dIy ϭ x2 dA, respectively. The moments of inertia of A about
the same axes are therefore

(c)

Figure A/1
y

͵y
I ϭ͵ x

A
x
r

Ix ϭ

dA
y

y

2

dA
(A/1)

2

dA

x

O

Figure A/2

where we carry out the integration over the entire area.

Article A/2

The moment of inertia of dA about the pole O (z-axis) is, by similar
deﬁnition, dIz ϭ r2 dA. The moment of inertia of the entire area about
O is
Iz ϭ

͵r

2

dA

(A/2)

The expressions deﬁned by Eqs. A/1 are called rectangular moments of
inertia, whereas the expression of Eq. A/2 is called the polar moment of
inertia.* Because x2 ϩ y2 ϭ r2, it is clear that
Iz ϭ I x ϩ I y

(A/3)

For an area whose boundaries are more simply described in rectangular
coordinates than in polar coordinates, its polar moment of inertia is easily calculated with the aid of Eq. A/3.
The moment of inertia of an element involves the square of the distance from the inertia axis to the element. Thus an element whose coordinate is negative contributes as much to the moment of inertia as does
an equal element with a positive coordinate of the same magnitude.
Consequently the area moment of inertia about any axis is always a positive quantity. In contrast, the ﬁrst moment of the area, which was involved in the computations of centroids, could be either positive,
negative, or zero.
The dimensions of moments of inertia of areas are clearly L4, where
L stands for the dimension of length. Thus, the SI units for area moments of inertia are expressed as quartic meters (m4) or quartic millimeters (mm4). The U.S. customary units for area moments of inertia are
quartic feet (ft4) or quartic inches (in.4).
The choice of the coordinates to use for the calculation of moments
of inertia is important. Rectangular coordinates should be used for
shapes whose boundaries are most easily expressed in these coordinates.
Polar coordinates will usually simplify problems involving boundaries
which are easily described in r and ␪. The choice of an element of area
which simpliﬁes the integration as much as possible is also important.
These considerations are quite analogous to those we discussed and illustrated in Chapter 5 for the calculation of centroids.

Radius of Gyration
Consider an area A, Fig. A/3a, which has rectangular moments of
inertia Ix and Iy and a polar moment of inertia Iz about O. We now visualize this area as concentrated into a long narrow strip of area A a distance kx from the x-axis, Fig. A/3b. By deﬁnition the moment of inertia
of the strip about the x-axis will be the same as that of the original area
if kx2A ϭ Ix. The distance kx is called the radius of gyration of the area
*The polar moment of inertia of an area is sometimes denoted in mechanics literature by
the symbol J.

Deﬁnitions

443

444

Appendix A

Area Moments of Inertia
y

y

y

A
ky
y
–
x

A

A

kz

A

x

O

C
–
y

kx

x

O

x

O
x

O
(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure A/3

about the x-axis. A similar relation for the y-axis is written by considering the area as concentrated into a narrow strip parallel to the y-axis as
shown in Fig. A/3c. Also, if we visualize the area as concentrated into a
narrow ring of radius kz as shown in Fig. A/3d, we may express the polar
moment of inertia as kz2A ϭ Iz. In summary we write
Ix ϭ kx2A
I y ϭ ky

2A

kx ϭ ΊIx /A
or

Iz ϭ kz2A

ky ϭ ΊIy /A

(A/4)

kz ϭ ΊIz /A

The radius of gyration, then, is a measure of the distribution of the area
from the axis in question. A rectangular or polar moment of inertia may
be expressed by specifying the radius of gyration and the area.
When we substitute Eqs. A/4 into Eq. A/3, we have
kz2 ϭ kx2 ϩ ky2

y

y0
dy

x0

A

dA
y0
C

x0
dx

d

x

O

Figure A/4

(A/5)

Thus, the square of the radius of gyration about a polar axis equals the
sum of the squares of the radii of gyration about the two corresponding
rectangular axes.
Do not confuse the coordinate to the centroid C of an area with the
radius of gyration. In Fig. A/3a the square of the centroidal distance
from the x-axis, for example, is y 2, which is the square of the mean
value of the distances from the elements of the area to the x-axis. The
quantity kx2, on the other hand, is the mean of the squares of these distances. The moment of inertia is not equal to Ay 2, since the square of
the mean is less than the mean of the squares.

Transfer of Axes
The moment of inertia of an area about a noncentroidal axis may be
easily expressed in terms of the moment of inertia about a parallel centroidal axis. In Fig. A/4 the x0-y0 axes pass through the centroid C of the
area. Let us now determine the moments of inertia of the area about the

Article A/2

parallel x-y axes. By deﬁnition, the moment of inertia of the element dA
about the x-axis is
dIx ϭ (y0 ϩ dx)2 dA
Expanding and integrating give us
Ix ϭ

͵y

0

2

dA ϩ 2dx

͵ y dA ϩ d ͵ dA
0

x

2

We see that the ﬁrst integral is by deﬁnition the moment of inertia Ix
about the centroidal x0-axis. The second integral is zero, since ͐ y0 dA ϭ
Ay0 and y0 is automatically zero with the centroid on the x0-axis. The
third term is simply Adx2. Thus, the expression for Ix and the similar expression for Iy become
Ix ϭ Ix ϩ Adx2
Iy ϭ Iy ϩ Ady2

(A/6)

By Eq. A/3 the sum of these two equations gives
Iz ϭ Iz ϩ Ad2

(A/6a)

Equations A/6 and A/6a are the so-called parallel-axis theorems. Two
points in particular should be noted. First, the axes between which the
transfer is made must be parallel, and second, one of the axes must pass
through the centroid of the area.
If a transfer is desired between two parallel axes neither of which
passes through the centroid, it is ﬁrst necessary to transfer from one
axis to the parallel centroidal axis and then to transfer from the centroidal axis to the second axis.
The parallel-axis theorems also hold for radii of gyration. With substitution of the deﬁnition of k into Eqs. A/6, the transfer relation
becomes
k2 ϭ k2 ϩ d2

(A/6b)

where k is the radius of gyration about a centroidal axis parallel to the
axis about which k applies and d is the distance between the two axes.
The axes may be either in the plane or normal to the plane of the area.
A summary of the moment-of-inertia relations for some common
plane ﬁgures is given in Table D/3, Appendix D.

Deﬁnitions

445

446

Appendix A

Area Moments of Inertia

SAMPLE PROBLEM A/1

y0

y

Determine the moments of inertia of the rectangular area about the centroidal x0- and y0-axes, the centroidal polar axis z0 through C, the x-axis, and the
polar axis z through O.

For the calculation of the moment of inertia Ix about the x0-axis, a
ᕡ horizontal strip of area b dy is chosen so that all elements of the strip have the
same y-coordinate. Thus,

dy
h
––
2

y

[Ix ϭ

͵ y dA]
2

Ix ϭ

͵

h/2

1
Iy ϭ 12hb3

Ans.

The centroidal polar moment of inertia is
1
1
Iz ϭ 12(bh3 ϩ hb3) ϭ 12 A(b2 ϩ h2)

Ans.

By the parallel-axis theorem the moment of inertia about the x-axis is
[Ix ϭ Ix ϩ Adx2]

1

Ix ϭ 12 bh3 ϩ bh

΂h΃
2

2

x

Ans.

By interchange of symbols, the moment of inertia about the centroidal y0-axis is

[Iz ϭ Ix ϩ Iy]

h
––
2
O

1
y2b dy ϭ 12 bh3

Ϫh/2

x0

C

Solution.

ϭ 1 bh3 ϭ 1 Ah2
3
3

Ans.

b

Helpful Hint

ᕡ If we had started with the second-

order element dA ϭ dx dy, integration with respect to x holding y
constant amounts simply to multiplication by b and gives us the expression y2b dy, which we chose at
the outset.

We also obtain the polar moment of inertia about O by the parallel-axis theorem,
which gives us
[Iz ϭ Iz ϩ Ad2]

b
΄΂2΃ ϩ ΂h΃ ΅
2
2

1
Iz ϭ 12 A(b2 ϩ h2) ϩ A

2

1

Iz ϭ 3A(b2 ϩ h2)

Ans.

SAMPLE PROBLEM A/2

x′

Determine the moments of inertia of the triangular area about its base and
about parallel axes through its centroid and vertex.
dy

ᕡ Solution. A strip of area parallel to the base is selected as shown in the ﬁgure,
ᕢ and it has the area dA ϭ x dy ϭ [(h Ϫ y)b/h] dy. By deﬁnition
[Ix ϭ

͵

y2

dA]

Ix ϭ

͵

h

0

y2

΄

h

΅

hϪy
y3
y4
b dy ϭ b
Ϫ
3
h
4h

0

bh3
ϭ
12

Ans.

[I ϭ I Ϫ Ad2]

΂ ΃΂ ΃
h
3

2

bh3
ϭ
36

Ans.

A transfer from the centroidal axis to the xЈ-axis through the vertex gives
[I ϭ I ϩ Ad2]

IxЈ ϭ

΂ ΃΂2h΃
3

bh3
bh
ϩ
2
36

2

ϭ

bh3
4

y
x

b

Helpful Hints

By the parallel-axis theorem the moment of inertia I about an axis through the
centroid, a distance h/3 above the x-axis, is
bh3
bh
Ϫ
Iϭ
2
12

x

h

Ans.

ᕡ Here again we choose the simplest
possible element. If we had chosen
dA ϭ dx dy, we would have to integrate y2 dx dy with respect to x ﬁrst.
This gives us y2x dy, which is the expression we chose at the outset.

ᕢ Expressing x in terms of y should
cause no difﬁculty if we observe the
proportional relationship between
the similar triangles.

Article A/2

SAMPLE PROBLEM A/3

Deﬁnitions

447

y

Calculate the moments of inertia of the area of a circle about a diametral
axis and about the polar axis through the center. Specify the radii of gyration.
dr0

r
r0

A differential element of area in the form of a circular ring may be
ᕡ used for the calculation of the moment of inertia about the polar z-axis through
O since all elements of the ring are equidistant from O. The elemental area is
dA ϭ 2␲r0 dr0, and thus,

Solution.

[Iz ϭ

͵r

2

dA]

Iz ϭ

͵

r

r02(2␲r0 dr0) ϭ

0

␲r4 1 2
ϭ 2 Ar
2

Ans.
y

The polar radius of gyration is

dr0

I
΄k ϭ ΊA ΅

kz ϭ

r
Ί2

Ix ϭ 1 Iz ϭ
2

dθ

Ans.
r0

By symmetry Ix ϭ Iy, so that from Eq. A/3
[Iz ϭ Ix ϩ Iy]

x

O

O

␲r4 1 2
ϭ 4 Ar
4

θ
r

r0 sin θ
x

Ans.

The radius of gyration about the diametral axis is
I
΄k ϭ ΊA ΅

kx ϭ

r
2

Ans.

The foregoing determination of Ix is the simplest possible. The result may
also be obtained by direct integration, using the element of area dA ϭ r0 dr0 d␪
shown in the lower ﬁgure. By deﬁnition
[Ix ϭ

͵ y dA]
2

͵ ͵
2␲

Ix ϭ

0

r

0

(r0 sin ␪)2r0 dr0 d␪

ϭ

ᕢ

͵

ϭ

sin 2␪
r4 1
␪Ϫ
2
4 2

2␲

0

r4 sin2 ␪
d␪
4

΄

2␲

΅

0

ϭ

␲r4
4

Helpful Hints

ᕡ Polar coordinates are certainly indicated here. Also, as before, we
choose the simplest and lowest-order
element possible, which is the differential ring. It should be evident immediately from the deﬁnition that
the polar moment of inertia of the
ring is its area 2␲r0 dr0 times r02.

ᕢ This integration is straightforward,
Ans.

but the use of Eq. A/3 along with the
result for Iz is certainly simpler.

448

Appendix A

Area Moments of Inertia

SAMPLE PROBLEM A/4

y

Determine the moment of inertia of the area under the parabola about the
x-axis. Solve by using (a) a horizontal strip of area and (b) a vertical strip of area.

3
2

y

k
x=
4

The constant k ϭ 9 is obtained ﬁrst by substituting x ϭ 4 and y ϭ 3
into the equation for the parabola.

Solution.

Since all parts of the horizontal strip are the same distance from the x-axis, the moment of inertia of the strip about the x-axis is y2 dA
where dA ϭ (4 Ϫ x) dy ϭ 4(1 Ϫ y2/9) dy. Integrating with respect to y gives us

(a) Horizontal strip.

[Ix ϭ

͵ y dA]
2

͵ 4y ΂1 Ϫ y9 ΃ dy ϭ 72 ϭ 14.4 (units)
5
3

Ix ϭ

2

2

4

0

0
2 /9

y

x=

x

4y

dy
Solution (a)
y

Ans.

0

x

Here all parts of the element are at different distances
from the x-axis, so we must use the correct expressions for the moment of inertia
of the elemental rectangle about its base, which, from Sample Problem A/1, is
bh3/3. For the width dx and the height y the expression becomes

(b) Vertical strip.

y

2 /9

x=

4y

Solution (b)
y

dIx ϭ 1(dx)y3
3

x

To integrate with respect to x, we must express y in terms of x, which gives
y ϭ 3Ίx/2, and the integral becomes
Ix ϭ 1
3

ᕡ

͵ ΂3Ίx΃ dx ϭ 72 ϭ 14.4 (units)
2
5
4

x

4

3

4

Ans.

0

x

dx

Helpful Hint

ᕡ There is little preference between Solutions (a) and (b). Solution (b) requires knowing the moment of inertia
for a rectangular area about its base.

SAMPLE PROBLEM A/5
Find the moment of inertia about the x-axis of the semicircular area.

C
20 mm

_
r

x0
x′

15 mm

Solution. The moment of inertia of the semicircular area about the xЈ-axis is
one-half of that for a complete circle about the same axis. Thus, from the results
of Sample Problem A/3,
IxЈ ϭ

1 ␲r4 204␲
ϭ
ϭ 2␲(104) mm4
2 4
8

We obtain the moment of inertia I about the parallel centroidal axis x0 next.
Transfer is made through the distance r ϭ 4r/(3␲) ϭ (4)(20)/(3␲) ϭ 80/(3␲) mm
by the parallel-axis theorem. Hence,
[I ϭ I Ϫ Ad 2]

I ϭ 2(104)␲ Ϫ

80
΂202 ␲΃΂3␲΃

2

2

Ix ϭ 1.755(104) ϩ

80
΂202 ␲΃΂15 ϩ 3␲΃
2

2

ϭ 1.755(104) ϩ 34.7(104) ϭ 36.4(104) mm4

Helpful Hint

ᕡ This problem illustrates the caution

ϭ 1.755(104) mm4

ᕡ Finally, we transfer from the centroidal x0-axis to the x-axis. Thus,
[I ϭ I ϩ Ad 2]

x

Ans.

we should observe in using a double
transfer of axes since neither the xЈnor the x-axis passes through the
centroid C of the area. If the circle
were complete with the centroid on
the xЈ axis, only one transfer would
be needed.

Article A/2

SAMPLE PROBLEM A/6

Deﬁnitions

449

y
x

Calculate the moment of inertia about the x-axis of the area enclosed between the y-axis and the circular arcs of radius a whose centers are at O and A.

Solution. The choice of a vertical differential strip of area permits one integration to cover the entire area. A horizontal strip would require two integrations
with respect to y by virtue of the discontinuity. The moment of inertia of the
strip about the x-axis is that of a strip of height y2 minus that of a strip of height
y1. Thus, from the results of Sample Problem A/1 we write

a

dIx ϭ 1(y2 dx)y22 Ϫ 1(y1 dx)y12 ϭ 1(y23 Ϫ y13) dx
3
3
3

dx

O

The values of y2 and y1 are obtained from the equations of the two curves,
which are x2 ϩ y22 ϭ a2 and (x Ϫ a)2 ϩ y12 ϭ a2, and which give y2 ϭ Ίa2 Ϫ x2
ᕡ and y1 ϭ Ίa2 Ϫ (x Ϫ a)2. Thus,
Ix ϭ 1
3

͵

a/2

0

Simultaneous solution of the two equations which deﬁne the two circles gives
the x-coordinate of the intersection of the two curves, which, by inspection, is
a/2. Evaluation of the integrals gives
a/2

0
a/2

x2Ίa2 Ϫ x2

0

͵

Ϫ

͵

a/2

a2Ίa2 Ϫ (x Ϫ a)2

0

΂
΃
a Ί3 ␲
ϩ ΃
dx ϭ
16 ΂ 4
3
a Ί3 2␲
ϩ
dx ϭ
4 ΂2
3΃

a2Ίa2 Ϫ x2 dx ϭ

a/2

0

(x Ϫ a)2Ίa2 Ϫ (x Ϫ a)2 dx ϭ

a4 Ί3 ␲
ϩ
4 2
3
4

4

΂

a4 Ί3 ␲
ϩ
8 8
3

΃

Collection of the integrals with the factor of 1 gives
3
Ix ϭ

a4
(9Ί3 Ϫ 2␲) ϭ 0.0969a4
96

Ans.

If we had started from a second-order element dA ϭ dx dy, we would write y2 dx dy
for the moment of inertia of the element about the x-axis. Integrating from y1 to y2
holding x constant produces for the vertical strip
dIx ϭ

΄͵

y2

y1

y1
A
a/2

a

x

Helpful Hint

ᕡ We choose the positive signs for the

{(a2 Ϫ x2)Ίa2 Ϫ x2 Ϫ [a2 Ϫ (x Ϫ a)2]Ίa2 Ϫ (x Ϫ a)2} dx

͵
Ϫ͵

y2

΅

y2 dy dx ϭ 1(y23 Ϫ y13) dx
3

which is the expression we started with by having the moment-of-inertia result
for a rectangle in mind.

radicals here since both y1 and y2 lie
above the x-axis.

450

Appendix A

Area Moments of Inertia
A/4 Calculate the moment of inertia of the shaded area
about the y-axis.

PROBLEMS
Introductory Problems

y

A/1 If the moment of inertia of the thin strip of area
about the x-axis is 2.56(106) mm4, determine the area
A of the strip to within a close approximation.

40
y = x2/3

y
10
40 mm

x

O
x

O

Problem A/4
Problem A/1

A/2 Determine the moments of inertia of the rectangular
area about the x- and y-axes and ﬁnd the polar moment
of inertia about point O.

A/5 The moments of inertia of the area A about the parallel p- and pЈ-axes differ by 15(106) mm4. Compute the
area A, which has its centroid at C.
25 mm

y
50 mm
b
––
3

2b
––
3
x

O

p
C

p′
h
A

Problem A/5
Problem A/2

A/3 Determine by direct integration the moment of inertia of the triangular area about the y-axis.

A/6 Use the differential element shown to determine the
moments of inertia of the triangular area about the
x- and y-axes. Also determine the polar moment of
inertia about point O.
y

y
h

O

b
Problem A/3

b
––
2

b
––
2

x

dy
h
y
O
Problem A/6

x

Article A/2
A/7 Determine the polar moments of inertia of the semicircular area about points A and B.

Problems

451

y

y
C

B
t << r

r

r
A

O

Problem A/10

Problem A/7

A/8 The area of the narrow strip of uniform width is
750 mm2. Using the fact that the width is small compared with the length of the strip, approximate its
moment of inertia about the x-axis. Compare your
answer with the erroneous result of multiplying the
area by the square of its distance from its centroid
to the x-axis.

150

x

O

x

A/11 Use the relationships developed and used in Sample Problem A/1 to determine expressions for the
rectangular and polar moments of inertia Ix, Iy,
and IO of the thin rectangular strip of area A where
t is very small compared with b.
y

mm

b

100 mm
50 mm

t << b
x
O

Problem A/8

A/9 Determine the polar radii of gyration of the triangular area about points O and A.
A

a

x

b
Problem A/11

A/12 Determine the moments of inertia of the quartercircular area about the x- and y-axes, and ﬁnd the
polar radius of gyration about point O.
y

a

a

O
a
Problem A/9
x

O

Representative Problems
A/10 Determine the moments of inertia Ix and Iy of the
area of the thin semicircular ring about the x- and
y-axes. Also ﬁnd the polar moment of inertia IC of
the ring about its centroid C.

Problem A/12

452

Appendix A

Area Moments of Inertia

A/13 Determine the radius of gyration about a polar axis
through the midpoint A of the hypotenuse of the
right-triangular area. (Hint: Simplify your calculation by observing the results for a 30 ϫ 40-mm rectangular area.)

A/16 Determine the rectangular and polar radii of gyration of the shaded area about the axes shown.
y

x3
y = ––
4

40 mm

A

30 mm
Problem A/13

0

A/14 Determine by direct integration the moments of inertia of the trapezoidal area about the x- and y-axes.
Find the polar moment of inertia about point O.
y

0

1

x

2

Problem A/16

A/17 In two different ways show that the moments of inertia of the square area about the x- and xЈ-axes are
the same.

a

x′
a
a/2

h

x

C
O

x

b

a/2

Problem A/14

A/15 Determine the moment of inertia about the x-axis of
the shaded area shown.

Problem A/17

A/18 Determine by direct integration the moments of inertia of the trapezoidal area about the x- and y-axes.

y

y

b

πx
y = b cos —–
2a

0

0

a

b2
––
2

b2
––
2

h

x
O

Problem A/15

b1
––
2

x
b1
––
2

Problem A/18

Article A/2
A/19 Determine the moment of inertia of the elliptical
area about the y-axis and ﬁnd the polar radius of
gyration about the origin O of the coordinates.
y
x2 y2
—+— =1
a2 b2

Problems

453

A/22 The moment of inertia about the x-axis of the rectangle of area A is approximately equal to Ad2 if h is
small compared with d. Determine and plot the percentage error n of the approximate value for h /d ratios from 0.1 to 1. What is the percentage error for
h ϭ d/4?
b

b

h/2
a

O

x0

x

h/2
d

x
Problem A/19
Problem A/22

A/20 Determine the polar radius of gyration of the area of
the equilateral triangle about the midpoint M of its
base.

A/23 Determine the moment of inertia of the quartercircular area about the tangent xЈ-axis.
y
x′

a

a

a
a/2

M

x

a/2
Problem A/23

Problem A/20

A/21 Determine the moments of inertia of the shaded
area about the x- and y-axes. Use the same differential element for both calculations.

A/24 Determine the moments of inertia of the shaded
area about the y- and yЈ-axes.
y

y′

y
x = ky2
200
mm

x2
y= —
a

x
200
mm

a

a
Problem A/21

x

400 mm
Problem A/24

454

Appendix A

Area Moments of Inertia

A/25 Calculate by direct integration the moment of inertia of the shaded area about the x-axis. Solve, ﬁrst,
by using a horizontal strip having differential area
and, second, by using a vertical strip of differential
area.

A/28 Calculate the moment of inertia of the shaded area
about the x-axis.
y
6′′

y
4″
3′′
y = kx2

x = ky2

4″

0
x

0

x

6′′
Problem A/28

Problem A/25

A/26 Determine the moment of inertia of the shaded area
about the x-axis using (a) a horizontal strip of area
and (b) a vertical strip of area.

A/29 Determine the radius of gyration about the y-axis of
the shaded area shown.
y

y
Parabolic
80 mm

b
40 mm
x
x

a

80 mm

80 mm
Problem A/29

Problem A/26

A/27 Determine the moment of inertia about the x-axis
and the polar radius of gyration about point O for
the semicircular area shown.

A/30 Determine the moments of inertia of the circular
sector about the x- and y-axes.
y

y
r

α
A

B

α

a

O

r

Problem A/30
x

O
Problem A/27

x

Article A/2
A/31 From considerations of symmetry show that IxЈ ϭ
IyЈ ϭ Ix ϭ Iy for the semicircular area regardless of
the angle ␣.
y′

Problems

455

A/33 By the methods of this article, determine the rectangular and polar radii of gyration of the shaded
area about the axes shown.
y

y

x′

r

a

α

x

O

a
–
2

Problem A/31

x
O

A/32 Calculate the moments of inertia of the shaded area
about the x- and y-axes, and ﬁnd the polar moment
of inertia about point O.

Problem A/33

᭤A/34 Calculate the moment of inertia of the shaded area
of the two overlapping circles about the x-axis.

y
4″

y
y = k2 x
4″

r

r

x

y = k1x3
x

O
Problem A/32

Problem A/34

456

Appendix A

Area Moments of Inertia

A/3

Composite Areas

It is frequently necessary to calculate the moment of inertia of an
area composed of a number of distinct parts of simple and calculable
geometric shape. Because a moment of inertia is the integral or sum of
the products of distance squared times element of area, it follows that
the moment of inertia of a positive area is always a positive quantity.
The moment of inertia of a composite area about a particular axis is
therefore simply the sum of the moments of inertia of its component
parts about the same axis. It is often convenient to regard a composite
area as being composed of positive and negative parts. We may then
treat the moment of inertia of a negative area as a negative quantity.
When a composite area is composed of a large number of parts, it is
convenient to tabulate the results for each of the parts in terms of its
area A, its centroidal moment of inertia I, the distance d from its centroidal axis to the axis about which the moment of inertia of the entire
section is being computed, and the product Ad2. For any one of the parts
the moment of inertia about the desired axis by the transfer-of-axis theorem is I ϩ Ad2. Thus, for the entire section the desired moment of inertia becomes I ϭ ΣI ϩ Σ Ad2.
For such an area in the x-y plane, for example, and with the notation of Fig. A/4, where Ix is the same as Ix0 and Iy is the same as Iy0 the
tabulation would include
Part

Area, A

Sums

ΣA

dx

Adx2

Ady2

Ix

Iy

ΣAdx2

dy

ΣAdy2

ΣIx

ΣIy

From the sums of the four columns, then, the moments of inertia
for the composite area about the x- and y-axes become
Ix ϭ ΣIx ϩ ΣAdx2
Iy ϭ ΣIy ϩ ΣAdy2
Although we may add the moments of inertia of the individual parts
of a composite area about a given axis, we may not add their radii of gyration. The radius of gyration for the composite area about the axis in
question is given by k ϭ ΊI/A, where I is the total moment of inertia and
A is the total area of the composite ﬁgure. Similarly, the radius of gyration k about a polar axis through some point equals ΊIz/A, where Iz ϭ
Ix ϩ Iy for x-y axes through that point.

Article A/3

SAMPLE PROBLEM A/7

Composite Areas

457

y

Determine the moments of inertia about the x- and y-axes for the shaded
area. Make direct use of the expressions given in Table D/3 for the centroidal
moments of inertia of the constituent parts.

30 mm

30 mm

30 mm

The given area is subdivided into the three subareas shown—a rectangular (1), a quarter-circular (2), and a triangular (3) area. Two of the subareas are “holes” with negative areas. Centroidal x0Ϫy0 axes are shown for areas
(2) and (3), and the locations of centroids C2 and C3 are from Table D/3.

Solution.

x
40 mm

40 mm

y

The following table will facilitate the calculations.

y0
r
r

(2)
C2

x0
(1)

y0
(3)
C3

r = 4(30) = 12.73 mm
––––
3π

[Ix ϭ Σ Ix ϩ Σ Adx2]
2]

[Iy ϭ Σ Iy ϩ Σ Ady

Ix ϭ 1.366(106) ϩ 2.68(106) ϭ 4.05(106) mm4
Iy ϭ

2.46(106)

ϩ

4.90(106)

ϭ

7.36(106)

mm4

Ans.
Ans.

The following sample problem will determine Ix by a different technique. For
example, the area moment of inertia of subareas (1) and (3) about the x-axis are
commonly tabulated quantities. While the above solution began with the centroidal
moments of inertia of subareas (1) and (3), the following sample problem will make
more direct use of the tabulated moments of inertia about the baselines.

10 mm
40
––
3
mm

x0
x

458

Appendix A

Area Moments of Inertia

SAMPLE PROBLEM A/8
30 mm

Calculate the moment of inertia and radius of gyration about the x-axis for
the shaded area shown. Wherever possible, make expedient use of tabulated
moments of inertia.

30 mm

30 mm
x

The composite area is composed of the positive area of the rectangle
(1) and the negative areas of the quarter circle (2) and triangle (3). For the rectangle the moment of inertia about the x-axis, from Sample Problem A/1 (or
Table D/3), is

40 mm

Solution.

x′ _
r

x0

Ix ϭ 1 Ah2 ϭ 1(80)(60)(60)2 ϭ 5.76(106) mm4
3
3

(2)
C
(1)

From Sample Problem A/3 (or Table D/3), the moment of inertia of the negative
quarter-circular area about its base axis xЈ is

΂ ΃

␲
1 ␲r4
IxЈ ϭ Ϫ
ϭ Ϫ (30)4 ϭ Ϫ0.1590(106) mm4
4 4
16
We now transfer this result through the distance r ϭ 4r/(3␲) ϭ 4(30)/(3␲) ϭ
12.73 mm by the transfer-of-axis theorem to get the centroidal moment of inertia of part (2) (or use Table D/3 directly).

ᕡ [I ϭ I Ϫ Ad2]

΄

Ix ϭ Ϫ0.1590(106) Ϫ Ϫ

΅

␲(30)2
(12.73)2
4

ϭ Ϫ0.0445(106) mm4

΄

Ix ϭ Ϫ0.0445(106) ϩ Ϫ

΅

1
1
Ix ϭ Ϫ12bh3 ϭ Ϫ12(40)(30)3 ϭ Ϫ0.90(106) mm4

The total moment of inertia about the x-axis of the composite area is,
consequently,
Ans.

This result agrees with that of Sample Problem A/7.
The net area of the ﬁgure is A ϭ 60(80) Ϫ 1␲(30)2 Ϫ 1(40)(30) ϭ 3490 mm2 so
2
4
that the radius of gyration about the x-axis is
kx ϭ ΊIx/A ϭ Ί4.05(106)/3490 ϭ 34.0 mm

ᕡ Note that we must transfer the moment of inertia for the quartercircular area to its centroidal axis x0
before we can transfer it to the
x-axis, as was done in Sample Problem A/5.

ᕣ Always use common sense at key

Finally, the moment of inertia of the negative triangular area (3) about its base,
from Sample Problem A/2 (or Table D/3), is

Ix ϭ 5.76(106) Ϫ 1.624(106) Ϫ 0.09(106) ϭ 4.05(106) mm4

Helpful Hints

Since the area is negative, both I
and A carry negative signs.

␲(30)2
(60 Ϫ 12.73)2
4

ϭ Ϫ1.624(106) mm4

ᕣ

(3)

ᕢ We watch our signs carefully here.

The moment of inertia of the quarter-circular part about the x-axis is now

ᕢ [I ϭ I ϩ Ad2]

40 mm

Ans.

points such as this. The two minus
signs are consistent with the fact
that subareas (2) and (3) reduce the
numerical value of the moment of
inertia of the basic rectangular area.

x

Article A/3

PROBLEMS

Problems

459

y

Introductory Problems

2R

2R

A/35 Determine the moment of inertia about the x-axis of
the rectangular area without and with the central
rectangular hole.

2R
x

y

R
2R

h
—
4
h
—
2

x

h
—
4
b
—
4

b
—
2

Problem A/37

A/38 Determine the percent reductions in both area and
area moment of inertia about the y-axis caused by
removal of the rectangular cutout from the rectangular plate of base b and height h.

b
—
4

y

Problem A/35

A/36 Determine the moment of inertia about the y-axis
of the circular area without and with the central
square hole.

h/8

h
y
h/8
2b/3
b

R
R

Problem A/38
R

x

A/39 By the method of this article, determine the rectangular and polar radii of gyration of the shaded area,
repeated here from Prob. A/33, about the axes shown.
y

Problem A/36

A/37 Determine the percent reduction n in the polar moment of inertia of the square plate due to the introduction of the circular hole.

a

a
–
2

x
O

Problem A/39

460

Appendix A

Area Moments of Inertia

A/40 The cross-sectional area of a wide-ﬂange I-beam has
the dimensions shown. Obtain a close approximation
to the handbook value of Ix ϭ 657 in.4 by treating
the section as being composed of three rectangles.

A/43 Determine the moments of inertia of the shaded
area about the x- and y-axes.
y

y

a

x

16.25″

0.380″

x

O
7.073″

0.628″

Problem A/43

Problem A/40

Representative Problems

A/41 Determine the moment of inertia of the shaded area
about the x-axis in two ways. The wall thickness is
20 mm on all four sides of the rectangle.

A/44 Determine the moments of inertia of the Z-section
about its centroidal x0- and y0-axes.
100 mm

y
20 mm

y0
100 mm

x0

140 mm

x
20 mm

20 mm

100 mm
20 mm
100 mm

360 mm

Problem A/44

Problem A/41

A/42 Determine the moments of inertia of the shaded
area about the x- and y-axes.

A/45 Determine the moment of inertia of the shaded area
about the x-axis in two different ways.
4a

y

a
a

a
a
a

2a
a

Problem A/45
x

Problem A/42

x

Article A/3
A/46 A ﬂoor joist which measures a full 2 in. by 8 in. has
a 1-in. hole drilled through it for a water-pipe installation. Determine the percent reduction n in the
moment of inertia of the cross-sectional area about
the x-axis (compared with that of the undrilled joist)
for hole locations in the range 0 Յ y Յ 3.5 in. Evaluate your expression for y ϭ 2 in.

Problems

461

A/49 The rectangular area shown in part a of the ﬁgure is
split into three equal areas which are then arranged
as shown in part b of the ﬁgure. Determine an expression for the moment of inertia of the area in
part b about the centroidal x-axis. What percent increase n over the moment of inertia for area a does
this represent if h ϭ 200 mm and b ϭ 60 mm?
1

2″

4″
1″
y

A

x

h

1 2 3

x

x

2

4″
3
Section A

b
(a)

Problem A/46

A/47 Determine the polar radius of gyration about point
A for the shaded area shown.
80 mm

(b)
Problem A/49

A/50 Develop a formula for the moment of inertia of the
regular hexagonal area of side a about its central
x-axis.
a

80
mm
O

60 mm

x

A
Problem A/47

A/48 Calculate the polar radius of gyration about point O
of the area shown. Note that the widths of the elements are small compared with their lengths.
y

30
––
4

30
––
4

Problem A/50

A/51 Approximate the moment of inertia about the x-axis
of the semicircular area by dividing it into ﬁve horizontal strips of equal width. Treat the moment of
inertia of each strip as its area (width times length
of its horizontal midline) times the square of the
distance from its midline to the x-axis. Compare
your result with the exact value.
y

100
x
O

1″
5″

30
––
4

x
Problem A/51

Problem A/48

462

Appendix A

Area Moments of Inertia

A/52 Determine the polar radius of gyration of the shaded
area about point O.

A/54 By the method of this article, determine the moments of inertia about the x- and y-axes of the trapezoidal area, repeated here from Prob. A/18.

y
y
b2
––
2

b2
––
2

h
O

a

x
b1
––
2

b1
––
2

Problem A/54
x

O
0.4a
Problem A/52

A/53 Calculate the polar radius of gyration of the shaded
area about its centroid C.
100

100

A/55 A hollow mast of circular section as shown is to be
stiffened by bonding two strips of the same material
and of rectangular section to the mast throughout
its length. Determine the proper dimension h of
each near-rectangle which will exactly double the
stiffness of the mast to bending in the y-z plane.
(Stiffness in the y-z plane is proportional to the area
moment of inertia about the x-axis.) Take the inner
boundary of each strip to be a straight line.
2″
y

h

y0
600
C

x0

4″

8″

x

100
500

h

Dimensions in millimeters
2″
Problem A/53
Problem A/55

Article A/3
A/56 Determine the moments of inertia of the shaded
area about the x- and y-axes. Also determine the
polar moment of inertia about point O.

Problems

463

A/59 Determine the polar moment of inertia about point
O of the shaded area shown.

y
0.6h

0.6h
30
30
30
20
0.75h

h
O

45°

160
Dimensions in millimeters
Problem A/59

x

O

45°

Problem A/56

A/57 Determine the moment of inertia of the shaded area
about the x-axis.

᭤A/60 For the H-beam section, determine the ﬂange width b
which will make the moments of inertia about the
central x- and y-axes equal. (Hint: The solution of a
cubic equation is required here. Refer to Art. C/4 or
C/11 of Appendix C for solving a cubic equation.)

y
y
b

a

x
10 mm

45°

45°

a
–
4

x
10 mm

Problem A/57

A/58 Calculate the moment of inertia of the 300 ϫ 100-mm
channel section about the centroidal x0-axis. Neglect
the ﬁllets and rounds and compare with the handbook
value of Ix ϭ 6.25(106) mm4.
16.2 mm

7.5 mmR

100 mm

12.5 mmR

G

17.5 mm
x0
18.8 mm

300 mm
Problem A/58

10 mm
100 mm
Problem A/60

464

Appendix A

Area Moments of Inertia

A/4

Products of Inertia and Rotation of Axes

In this article, we deﬁne the product of inertia with respect to rectangular axes and develop the parallel-axis theorem for centroidal and
noncentroidal axes. In addition, we discuss the effects of rotation of axes
on moments and products of inertia.

Deﬁnition
In certain problems involving unsymmetrical cross sections and in
the calculation of moments of inertia about rotated axes, an expression
dIxy ϭ xy dA occurs, which has the integrated form
Ixy ϭ

x

+y
x

x

Figure A/5

(A/7)

where x and y are the coordinates of the element of area dA ϭ dx dy.
The quantity Ixy is called the product of inertia of the area A with respect to the x-y axes. Unlike moments of inertia, which are always positive for positive areas, the product of inertia may be positive, negative,
or zero.
The product of inertia is zero whenever either of the reference axes
is an axis of symmetry, such as the x-axis for the area in Fig. A/5. Here
we see that the sum of the terms x(Ϫy) dA and x(ϩy) dA due to symmetrically placed elements vanishes. Because the entire area may be considered as composed of pairs of such elements, it follows that the product of
inertia Ixy for the entire area is zero.

y

–y

͵ xy dA

Transfer of Axes
By deﬁnition the product of inertia of the area A in Fig. A/4 with respect to the x- and y-axes in terms of the coordinates x0, y0 to the centroidal axes is

͵ (x ϩ d )(y ϩ d ) dA
ϭ ͵ x y dA ϩ d ͵ x dA ϩ d ͵ y dA ϩ d d ͵ dA

Ixy ϭ

0

0

y

0 0

x

x

y

0

y

0

x y

y0
dy

x0

A

dA
y0
C

d

x0
dx
x

O

Figure A/4, Repeated

Article A/4

Products of Inertia and Rotation of Axes

The ﬁrst integral is by deﬁnition the product of inertia about the centroidal axes, which we write as Ixy. The middle two integrals are both
zero because the ﬁrst moment of the area about its own centroid is necessarily zero. The fourth term is merely dx dy A. Thus, the transfer-ofaxis theorem for products of inertia becomes
Ixy ϭ Ixy ϩ dx dy A

(A/8)

Rotation of Axes
The product of inertia is useful when we need to calculate the moment of inertia of an area about inclined axes. This consideration leads
directly to the important problem of determining the axes about which
the moment of inertia is a maximum and a minimum.
In Fig. A/6 the moments of inertia of the area about the xЈ- and yЈaxes are

͵ yЈ dA ϭ ͵ (y cos ␪ Ϫ x sin ␪) dA
ϭ ͵ xЈ dA ϭ ͵ (y sin ␪ ϩ x cos ␪) dA

IxЈ ϭ

2

2

IyЈ

2

2

where xЈ and yЈ have been replaced by their equivalent expressions as
seen from the geometry of the ﬁgure.
θ
y sin
θ
x cos
y

y′

dA
x

y cos

x′
y′

θ

y

y

θ

O

θ

x′
x sin

θ

x

x

Figure A/6
Expanding and substituting the trigonometric identities
sin2 ␪ ϭ

1 Ϫ cos 2␪
2

cos2 ␪ ϭ

1 ϩ cos 2␪
2

and the deﬁning relations for Ix, Iy, Ixy give us
IxЈ ϭ
IyЈ ϭ

I x ϩ Iy
2
I x ϩ Iy
2

ϩ
Ϫ

I x Ϫ Iy
2
I x Ϫ Iy
2

cos 2␪ Ϫ Ixy sin 2␪
(A/9)
cos 2␪ ϩ Ixy sin 2␪

465

466

Appendix A

Area Moments of Inertia

In a similar manner we write the product of inertia about the inclined axes as
IxЈyЈ ϭ

͵ xЈyЈ dA ϭ ͵ (y sin ␪ ϩ x cos ␪)(y cos ␪ Ϫ x sin ␪) dA

Expanding and substituting the trigonometric identities
1

cos2 ␪ Ϫ sin2 ␪ ϭ cos 2␪

sin ␪ cos ␪ ϭ 2 sin 2␪

and the deﬁning relations for Ix, Iy, Ixy give us
IxЈyЈ ϭ

Ix Ϫ Iy
2

sin 2␪ ϩ Ixy cos 2␪

(A/9a)

Adding Eqs. A/9 gives IxЈ ϩ IyЈ ϭ Ix ϩ Iy ϭ Iz, the polar moment of inertia about O, which checks the results of Eq. A/3.
The angle which makes IxЈ and IyЈ either maximum or minimum
may be determined by setting the derivative of either IxЈ or IyЈ with respect to ␪ equal to zero. Thus,
dIxЈ
ϭ (Iy Ϫ Ix) sin 2␪ Ϫ 2Ixy cos 2␪ ϭ 0
d␪
Denoting this critical angle by ␣ gives
tan 2␣ ϭ

2Ixy
Iy Ϫ I x

(A/10)

Equation A/10 gives two values for 2␣ which differ by ␲, since tan 2␣ ϭ
tan (2␣ ϩ ␲). Consequently the two solutions for ␣ will differ by ␲/2.
One value deﬁnes the axis of maximum moment of inertia, and the
other value deﬁnes the axis of minimum moment of inertia. These two
rectangular axes are called the principal axes of inertia.
When we substitute Eq. A/10 for the critical value of 2␪ in Eq. A/9a,
we see that the product of inertia is zero for the principal axes of inertia.
Substitution of sin 2␣ and cos 2␣, obtained from Eq. A/10, for sin 2␪ and
cos 2␪ in Eqs. A/9 gives the expressions for the principal moments of inertia as
Imax ϭ
Imin ϭ

Ix ϩ Iy
2
Ix ϩ Iy
2

ϩ

1
Ί(Ix Ϫ Iy)2 ϩ 4 Ixy2
2

(A/11)

1
Ϫ Ί(Ix Ϫ Iy)2 ϩ 4 Ixy2
2

Mohr’s Circle of Inertia
We may represent the relations in Eqs. A/9, A/9a, A/10, and A/11
graphically by a diagram called Mohr’s circle. For given values of Ix, Iy,

Article A/4

Ixy

Products of Inertia and Rotation of Axes

x′
x
θ

Ix
A

Ix′
C

Imin

Ix′y′
2θ
O

2α

x
A
Ixy

α

P
Axis through P of
maximum moment
of inertia
I

– Ixy
B
Iy

D
Iy′
Imax

Figure A/7
and Ixy the corresponding values of IxЈ, IyЈ, and IxЈyЈ may be determined
from the diagram for any desired angle ␪. A horizontal axis for the measurement of moments of inertia and a vertical axis for the measurement
of products of inertia are ﬁrst selected, Fig. A/7. Next, point A, which
has the coordinates (Ix, Ixy), and point B, which has the coordinates
(Iy, Ϫ Ixy), are located.
We now draw a circle with these two points as the extremities of a
diameter. The angle from the radius OA to the horizontal axis is 2␣ or
twice the angle from the x-axis of the area in question to the axis of
maximum moment of inertia. The angle on the diagram and the angle
on the area are both measured in the same sense as shown. The coordinates of any point C are (IxЈ, IxЈyЈ), and those of the corresponding point
D are (IyЈ, ϪIxЈyЈ). Also the angle between OA and OC is 2␪ or twice the
angle from the x-axis to the xЈ-axis. Again we measure both angles in the
same sense as shown. We may verify from the trigonometry of the circle
that Eqs. A/9, A/9a, and A/10 agree with the statements made.

467

468

Appendix A

Area Moments of Inertia

SAMPLE PROBLEM A/9

y

Determine the product of inertia of the rectangular area with centroid at C
with respect to the x-y axes parallel to its sides.

y0
dy

h

Since the product of inertia Ixy about the axes x0-y0 is zero by symmetry, the transfer-of-axis theorem gives us

Solution.

[Ixy ϭ Ixy ϩ dxdyA]

Ixy ϭ dxdybh

x0

C
dx

Ans.

b
x

In this example both dx and dy are shown positive. We must be careful to be consistent with the positive directions of dx and dy as deﬁned, so that their proper
signs are observed.

SAMPLE PROBLEM A/10

y

Determine the product of inertia about the x-y axes for the area under the
parabola.

b
2

ky
x=
x

With the substitution of x ϭ a when y ϭ b, the equation of the curve
becomes x ϭ ay2/b2.

Solution.

dx
dy
y
x

a
y

y0

If we start with the second-order element dA ϭ dx dy, we have
dIxy ϭ xy dx dy. The integral over the entire area is

Solution I.

͵͵
b

Ixy ϭ

0

a

͵ 1 ΂a Ϫ ab ΃ y dy ϭ
2
b

ay2/b2

xy dx dy ϭ

2 4
y

2

4

0

1 2 2
6a b

2

x=

a

0

y2
x dx ϭ
2

͵

a

0

b2 3
xb2
x dx ϭ
x
2a
6a

ͯ

a
0

ϭ 1 a2b2
6

x0

y

y/2

Alternatively we can start with a ﬁrst-order elemental strip and
save one integration by using the results of Sample Problem A/9. Taking a vertiᕡ cal strip dA ϭ y dx gives dIxy ϭ 0 ϩ (1 y)(x)(y dx), where the distances to the cen2
troidal axes of the elemental rectangle are dx ϭ y/2 and dy ϭ x. Now we have

͵

/b

Ans.

x

Solution II.

Ixy ϭ

ay

b

2

y

dx

a+x
——–
2
x

y0

x

a

b
dy
x0

Ans.

y

Helpful Hint

x

a

ᕡ If we had chosen a horizontal strip, our expression would have become

dIxy ϭ y 1 (a ϩ x)[(a Ϫ x) dy], which when integrated, of course, gives us
2
the same result as before.

SAMPLE PROBLEM A/11

y

Determine the product of inertia of the semicircular area with respect to the
x-y axes.
r

ᕡ Solution. We use the transfer-of-axis theorem, Eq. A/8, to write
[Ixy ϭ Ixy ϩ dxdyA]

4r
΂ 3␲΃ (r) ΂␲r ΃ ϭ Ϫ2r
2
3

Ixy ϭ 0 ϩ Ϫ

2

4

y0

C

Ans.

where the x- and y-coordinates of the centroid C are dy ϭ ϩr and dx ϭ Ϫ4r/(3␲).
Because y0 is an axis of symmetry, Ixy ϭ 0.

4r
––
3p

x
x0

Helpful Hint

ᕡ Proper use of the transfer-of-axis
theorem saves a great deal of labor
in computing products of inertia.

Article A/4

Products of Inertia and Rotation of Axes

SAMPLE PROBLEM A/12

y
10
mm

Determine the orientation of the principal axes of inertia through the centroid of the angle section and determine the corresponding maximum and minimum moments of inertia.

Solution. The location of the centroid C is easily calculated, and its position is
shown on the diagram.

2.5 mm

50 mm
C

x
7.5 mm

The product of inertia for each rectangle about its centroidal axes parallel to the x-y axes is zero by symmetry. Thus, the product of inertia about the x-y axes for part I is

Products of Inertia.

[Ixy ϭ Ixy ϩ dxdyA]
where

dx ϭ Ϫ(7.5 ϩ 5) ϭ Ϫ12.5 mm

and

dy ϭ ϩ(20 Ϫ 10 Ϫ 2.5) ϭ 7.5 mm

10 mm

Ixy ϭ 0 ϩ (Ϫ12.5)(ϩ7.5)(400) ϭ Ϫ3.75(104) mm4

40 mm
y
y′

Likewise for part II,
[Ixy ϭ Ixy ϩ dxdyA]
where

II
dy

Ixy ϭ 0 ϩ (12.5)(Ϫ7.5)(400) ϭ Ϫ3.75(104) mm4

dx ϭ ϩ(20 Ϫ 7.5) ϭ 12.5 mm,

x′

dy ϭ Ϫ(5 ϩ 2.5) ϭ Ϫ7.5 mm
dx

For the complete angle,

C

α

x

Ixy ϭ Ϫ3.75(104) Ϫ 3.75(104) ϭ Ϫ7.5(104) mm4

dx
I

The moments of inertia about the x- and y-axes for part

Moments of Inertia.

469

I are
dy

1
Ix ϭ 12(40)(10)3 ϩ (400)(12.5)2 ϭ 6.58(104) mm4

[I ϭ I ϩ Ad2]

1

Helpful Hint

Iy ϭ 12(10)(40)3 ϩ (400)(7.5)2 ϭ 7.58(104) mm4

Mohr’s circle. Alternatively we could use Eqs.
A/11 to obtain the results for Imax and Imin, or
we could construct the Mohr’s circle from the
calculated values of Ix, Iy, and Ixy. These values
are spotted on the diagram to locate points A
and B, which are the extremities of the diameter of the circle. The angle 2␣ and Imax and Imin
are obtained from the ﬁgure, as shown.

and the moments of inertia for part II about these same axes are
1
Ix ϭ 12(10)(40)3 ϩ (400)(12.5)2 ϭ 11.58(104) mm4

[I ϭ I ϩ Ad2]

1
Iy ϭ 12(40)(10)3 ϩ (400)(7.5)2 ϭ 2.58(104) mm4

Thus, for the entire section we have
Ix ϭ 6.58(10)4 ϩ 11.58(10)4 ϭ 18.17(104) mm4
Iy ϭ 7.58(104) ϩ 2.58(104) ϭ 10.17(104) mm4

Principal Axes. The inclination of the principal axes of inertia is given by Eq.

+Ixy , (10 4) mm4

A/10, so we have

Imax = 22.7

2Ixy

΄tan 2␣ ϭ I Ϫ I ΅
y

x

2(Ϫ7.50)
ϭ 1.875
tan 2␣ ϭ
10.17 Ϫ 18.17
2␣ ϭ 61.9Њ

Iy = 10.17
B

␣ ϭ 31.0Њ

Ans.

We now compute the principal moments of inertia from Eqs. A/9 using ␣ for
␪ and get Imax from IxЈ and Imin from IyЈ. Thus,

΄

΅

18.17 ϩ 10.17 18.17 Ϫ 10.17
ϩ
(0.471) ϩ (7.50)(0.882) (104)
Imax ϭ
2
2
ϭ 22.7(104) mm4
Imin ϭ

Ans.

΄18.17 ϩ 10.17 Ϫ 18.17 Ϫ 10.17 (0.471) Ϫ (7.50)(0.882)΅ (10 )
2
2

ϭ 5.67(104) mm4

–Ix y =
–(–7.5)
= +7.5

2α = 61.9°
Imin =
5.67

A
Ix = 18.17

4

Ans.

I, (10 4) mm4

–Ixy , (10 4) mm4

Ixy = –7.5

470

Appendix A

Area Moments of Inertia
A/63 Determine the product of inertia about the x-y axes
of the circular area with three equal square holes.

PROBLEMS
Introductory Problems

y

A/61 Determine the product of inertia of each of the four
areas about the x-y axes.

3″ 2″

y
50

50
3″
(a)

(b)

10″

2″
2″

60

30

x

3″
40

60
30

x
(c)

40

(d)

30

2″

60

3″

60
Problem A/63

30
Dimensions in millimeters

A/64 Determine the product of inertia of each of the four
areas about the x-y axes.

Problem A/61

y

A/62 Determine Ix, Iy, and Ixy for the rectangular plate
with three equal circular holes.
y
100

60
(b)

25

60

(a)

50

100

40
80
50
50

x

(c)
30

30
30

200

40

x

(d)

80

25
400

50

Dimensions in millimeters
Dimensions in millimeters
Problem A/62
Problem A/64

Article A/4
A/65 Determine the product of inertia of the rectangular
area about the x-y axes. Treat the case where b is
small compared with L.

Problems

471

A/68 Determine the products of inertia of the area of the
quarter-circular ring about the x-y axes and about
the x0 -y0 axes through the centroid C of the ring.
Treat b as very small compared with r.

y
b

y

L

y0

α

x
x0

C
Problem A/65

b<<r

A/66 Determine the product of inertia of the rectangular
strip number 1 about the x-y axes. Assume that the
width b is small compared with the length L. From
this ﬁrst result, determine the product of inertia for
each of the strips 2, 3, and 4. Verify that the sum of
the four results is zero.

b
L

L
α

x

O
Problem A/68

Representative Problems

y
2

r

α

A/69 Derive the expressions for the product of inertia of
the right-triangular area about the x-y axes and about
the centroidal x0 -y0 axes.

1
x

y
L

α α

L

y0
h

4

3

x0

C

Problem A/66

x

b

A/67 Determine the product of inertia of the shaded area
about the x-y axes.

Problem A/69

A/70 Derive the expression for the product of inertia of the
right-triangular area about the x-y axes. Solve, ﬁrst,
by double integration and, second, by single integration starting with a vertical strip as the element.

y

20

y

h

60

x
120
Dimensions in millimeters
Problem A/67

20

b
Problem A/70

x

472

Appendix A

Area Moments of Inertia

A/71 Obtain the product of inertia of the quarter-circular
area with respect to the x-y axes and use this result
to obtain the product of inertia with respect to the
parallel centroidal axes.
y

A/74 The products of inertia of the shaded area with respect to the x-y and xЈ-yЈ axes are 8(106) mm4 and
Ϫ42(106) mm4, respectively. Compute the area of
the ﬁgure, whose centroid is C.
y′

y0

y
50 mm

x′
30
mm

x0

C

60 mm

x

r

C

20 mm

x

Problem A/71

A/72 Calculate the product of inertia of the shaded area
about the x-y axes. (Hint: Take advantage of the
transfer-of-axes relations.)

Problem A/74

A/75 Determine the product of inertia of the trapezoidal
area about the x-y axes.

y
60

60

40

y

x
40

a

40
h
60
Problem A/72

A/73 Solve for the product of inertia of the semicircular
area about the x-y axes in two different ways.

x

b
Problem A/75

y

A/76 Determine the product of inertia of the elliptical
area about the x-y axes.
y
r
x

Ellipse

Problem A/73
b

a
Problem A/76

x

Article A/4
A/77 Obtain the product of inertia of the area of the circular sector with respect to the x-y axes. Evaluate
your general expression for the speciﬁc cases of
(a) quarter-circular and (b) semicircular areas.

473

A/80 Determine the moments and product of inertia of
the area of the equilateral triangle with respect to
the xЈ-yЈ axes.
y′

y

Problems

y

b

b
x′

θ

15°

x

r

x

b

Problem A/77

Problem A/80

A/78 Determine the product of inertia of the rhombic
area about the x-y axes. ( Hint: Regard the area as a
combination of a rectangle and triangles and use the
results of Prob. A/70.)

A/81 Determine the maximum and minimum moments of
inertia with respect to axes through C for the composite of the two areas shown. Find the angle ␣ measured counterclockwise from the x-axis to the axis of
maximum moment of inertia. Make use of the results
of Prob. A/69.

y

y
s
60°
s

a

x
2a

C

Problem A/78

x

2a
a

A/79 Determine the product of inertia of the shaded area
about the x-y axes.

Problem A/81

y

A/82 Determine the moments and product of inertia of
the quarter-circular area with respect to the xЈ-yЈ
axes.

x = ky3
a

y
b

x

y′

Problem A/79

x′

30°
r
Problem A/82

x

474

Appendix A

Area Moments of Inertia

A/83 Find Ix and Iy for the shaded area and show that the
x-y axes are principal axes of inertia.

y
2a

y

a

b
C
b

x

a
x
2a

Problem A/83

A/84 Sketch the Mohr’s circle of inertia for each of the
four rectangular areas with the proportions and
positions shown. Indicate on each diagram point A
which has coordinates (Ix, Ixy) and the angle 2␣,
where ␣ is the angle from the x-axis to the axis of
maximum moment of inertia.

Problem A/85

A/86 Determine the angle ␣ which locates the principal
axes of inertia through point O for the rectangular
area. Construct the Mohr’s circle of inertia and
specify the corresponding values of Imax and Imin.
y

y
y

x

x
2b
y′

(a)

(b)

x′

y

O

y

b

x

Problem A/86
x

(c)

x

A/87 Determine the maximum moment of inertia about
an axis through O and the angle ␣ to this axis for the
triangular area shown. Also construct the Mohr’s
circle of inertia.
y

(d)
Problem A/84

A/85 Determine the minimum and maximum moments of
inertia with respect to centroidal axes through C for
the composite of the two rectangular areas shown.
Find the angle ␣ measured from the x-axis to the axis
of maximum moment of inertia.

8″

x′

O

α
4″

Problem A/87

x

Article A/4

*Computer-Oriented Problems
*A/88 Plot the moment of inertia of the shaded area about
the xЈ-axis as a function of ␪ from ␪ ϭ 0 to ␪ ϭ 90Њ
and determine the minimum value of IxЈ and the
corresponding value of ␪.

Problems

475

* A/90 Determine and plot the moments and products of
inertia of the shaded area about the xЈ-yЈ axes as
functions of ␪ from ␪ ϭ 0 to ␪ ϭ ␲. State the minimum and maximum values of each function and the
corresponding values of ␪.
y
y′

0.5a

y
100
mm
a

x′

x′
200
mm

θ

100
mm
θ

O

x

O
x
Problem A/90

300
mm
Problem A/88

*A/89 Plot the moment of inertia of the shaded area about
the xЈ-axis for the range 0 Յ ␪ Յ 90Њ. Determine the
minimum value of IxЈ and the corresponding value
of ␪.
y

* A/91 The ﬁgure shows the cross section of a structural
concrete column. Determine and plot the product of
inertia IxЈyЈ of the sectional area about the xЈ-yЈ
axes as a function of ␪ from ␪ ϭ 0 to ␪ ϭ ␲ /2. Determine the angle ␪ for which IxЈyЈ ϭ 0. This information is critical to the design of the column to
determine the plane in which the column has a
minimum resistance to bending. Make use of the
results for Prob. A/69.

80 mm

y
60
mm

6″

2″
y′

120
mm

x′

4″
θ

y′

x′

θ
O
Problem A/89

x

60
mm

4″
x

2″

6″

Problem A/91

476

Appendix A

Area Moments of Inertia

*A/92 Plot the moment of inertia of the Z-section area
about the xЈ-axis as a function of ␪ from ␪ ϭ 0 to
␪ ϭ 90Њ. Determine the maximum value of IxЈ and
the corresponding value of ␪ from your plot, then
verify these results by using Eqs. A/10 and A/11.

* A/94 Determine the moment of inertia of the shaded area
about the xЈ-axis through O in terms of ␪ and plot it for
the range ␪ ϭ 0 to ␪ ϭ 180Њ. Find the maximum and
minimum values and their corresponding angles ␪.
y

50 mm
10 mm

30
y0

90
x′
x0

70 mm

120

10 mm

50 mm

y

x′

Problem A/93

240

Problem A/94

*A/93 Plot the moment of inertia of the shaded area about
the xЈ-axis as a function of ␪ from ␪ ϭ 0 to ␪ ϭ 180Њ.
Determine the maximum and minimum values of IxЈ
and the corresponding values of ␪.

b/2

O

Dimensions in millimeters

Problem A/92

θ
b/2

30

θ
10 mm

b

x′

x

x

Mass Moments
of Inertia

B

See Vol. 2 Dynamics for Appendix B, which fully treats the concept
and calculation of mass moment of inertia. Because this quantity is an
important element in the study of rigid-body dynamics and is not a factor in statics, we present only a brief deﬁnition in this Statics volume so
that the student can appreciate the basic differences between area and
mass moments of inertia.
Consider a three-dimensional body of mass m as shown in Fig. B/1.
The mass moment of inertia I about the axis O–O is deﬁned as
Iϭ

͵ r dm
2

where r is the perpendicular distance of the mass element dm from the
axis O–O and where the integration is over the entire body. For a given
rigid body the mass moment of inertia is a measure of the distribution of
its mass relative to the axis in question, and for that axis is a constant
property of the body. Note that the dimensions are (mass)(length)2,
which are kg ⅐ m2 in SI units and lb-ft-sec2 in U.S. customary units. Contrast these dimensions with those of area moment of inertia, which are
(length)4, m4 in SI units and ft4 in U.S. customary units.
O

r

dm

O

Figure B/1
477

This page intentionally left blank

Selected Topics
of Mathematics

C/1

C

Introduction

Appendix C contains an abbreviated summary and reminder of selected topics in basic mathematics which ﬁnd frequent use in mechanics.
The relationships are cited without proof. The student of mechanics will
have frequent occasion to use many of these relations, and he or she will be
handicapped if they are not well in hand. Other topics not listed will also
be needed from time to time.
As the reader reviews and applies mathematics, he or she should
bear in mind that mechanics is an applied science descriptive of real
bodies and actual motions. Therefore, the geometric and physical interpretation of the applicable mathematics should be kept clearly in mind
during the development of theory and the formulation and solution of
problems.

C/2

Plane Geometry

1. When two intersecting lines are, respectively, perpendicular
to two other lines,
the angles formed by
the two pairs are equal.

4. Circle

θ1

Circumference ϭ 2␲r
Area ϭ ␲r2
Arc length s ϭ r␪

θ2

y

5. Every triangle inscribed
within a semicircle is
a right triangle.

h

6. Angles of a triangle

h

x hϪy
ϭ
b
h

x

s

Sector area ϭ 1r2␪
2

θ1 = θ2

2. Similar triangles

r
θ

θ1

θ2

θ 1 + θ 2 = π /2

b

3. Any triangle
Area ϭ 1 bh
2
b

␪1 ϩ ␪2 ϩ ␪3 ϭ 180Њ
␪4 ϭ ␪1 ϩ ␪2

θ2

θ1

θ3 θ4

479

480

Appendix C

C/3

Selected Topics of Mathematics

Solid Geometry

1. Sphere

3. Right-circular cone

Volume ϭ 4␲r3
3

1

r

Surface area ϭ 4␲r2

Volume ϭ 3␲r2h

L

Lateral area ϭ ␲rL
L ϭ Ίr2 ϩ h2

h

r

2. Spherical wedge
2
Volume ϭ 3r3␪

4. Any pyramid or cone

r
θ

1

Volume ϭ 3Bh

h

where B ϭ area of base
B

C/4

Algebra

1. Quadratic equation

4. Cubic equation

ax2

ϩ bx ϩ c ϭ 0

x3 ϭ Ax ϩ B

xϭ

Ϫb Ϯ Ίb2 Ϫ 4ac 2
, b Ն 4ac for real roots
2a

Let p ϭ A/3, q ϭ B/2.

2. Logarithms

Case I:

bx ϭ y, x ϭ log b y

q2 Ϫ p3 negative (three roots real and
distinct)
cos u ϭ q/(p Ίp), 0 Ͻ u Ͻ 180Њ

Natural logarithms

x1 ϭ 2Ίp cos (u/3)

b ϭ e ϭ 2.718 282
ex ϭ y, x ϭ log e y ϭ ln y

x2 ϭ 2Ίp cos (u/3 ϩ 120Њ)

log (ab) ϭ log a ϩ log b
log (a/b) ϭ log a Ϫ log b
log (1/n) ϭ Ϫlog n
log an ϭ n log a
log 1 ϭ 0
log10x ϭ 0.4343 ln x
3. Determinants
2nd order
a1 b1
ϭ a1b2 Ϫ a2b1
a2 b2

ͯ

ͯ

3rd order
a 1 b 1 c1
a2 b2 c2 ϭ ϩa1b2c3 ϩ a2b3c1 ϩ a3b1c2
a 3 b 3 c3
Ϫa3b2c1 Ϫ a2b1c3 Ϫ a1b3c2

ͯ

ͯ

x3 ϭ 2Ίp cos (u/3 ϩ 240Њ)
Case II:

q2 Ϫ p3 positive (one root real, two
roots imaginary)

x1 ϭ (q ϩ Ίq2 Ϫ p3)1/3 ϩ (q Ϫ Ίq2 Ϫ p3)1/3
Case III:

q2 Ϫ p3 ϭ 0 (three roots real, two
roots equal)
x1 ϭ 2q1/3, x2 ϭ x3 ϭ Ϫq1/3

For general cubic equation
x3 ϩ ax2 ϩ bx ϩ c ϭ 0
Substitute x ϭ x0 Ϫ a/3 and get x03 ϭ Ax0 ϩ B.
Then proceed as above to ﬁnd values of x0 from
which x ϭ x0 Ϫ a/3.

Article C/6

C/5

Trigonometry

481

Analytic Geometry

1. Straight line

3. Parabola

y

y

y

a

a

m

b

b

1

a

y

x

b
x

x

a
x + – =1
y
–
a
b

y = a + mx

x
x2
y = b—
a2

2. Circle

y2
x = a—
b2

4. Ellipse
y

y

y

r

r

b

x

x

a
b

x2 + y2 = r2

x2 y2
—+— =1
a2 b2

x
a
2 + (y – b)2 = r2
(x – a)

5. Hyperbola
y

y

a

b
a

x

a

x2 y2
— –— =1
a2 b2

xy = a2

C/6

Trigonometry

1. Deﬁnitions
sin ␪ ϭ a/c
cos ␪ ϭ b/c
tan ␪ ϭ a/b

I

θ

2. Signs in the four quadrants
II

I

θ

(+) (–)

(+)

θ
(–)
III

θ

θ
(–)

(+)
(–)

IV

IV

sin ␪

ϩ

ϩ

Ϫ

Ϫ

ϩ

Ϫ

Ϫ

ϩ

ϩ

Ϫ

ϩ

Ϫ

csc ␪

a

III

cos ␪

c

II

tan ␪

csc ␪ ϭ c/a
sec ␪ ϭ c/b
cot ␪ ϭ b/a

b

(+)

x

ϩ

ϩ

Ϫ

Ϫ

sec ␪

ϩ

Ϫ

Ϫ

ϩ

cot ␪

ϩ

Ϫ

ϩ

Ϫ

482

Appendix C

Selected Topics of Mathematics

3. Miscellaneous relations
2

4. Law of sines

cos2

␪ϭ1
sin ␪ ϩ
1 ϩ tan2 ␪ ϭ sec2 ␪
1 ϩ cot2 ␪ ϭ csc2 ␪
␪
sin ϭ Ί1(1 Ϫ cos ␪)
2
2
␪
1
cos ϭ Ί2(1 ϩ cos ␪)
2
sin 2␪ ϭ 2 sin ␪ cos ␪
cos 2␪ ϭ cos2 ␪ Ϫ sin2 ␪
sin (a Ϯ b) ϭ sin a cos b Ϯ cos a sin b
cos (a Ϯ b) ϭ cos a cos b ϯ sin a sin b

C/7

a sin A
ϭ
b sin B

B
c

a

A

C

D

b

5. Law of cosines
c2 ϭ a2 ϩ b2 Ϫ 2ab cos C
c2 ϭ a2 ϩ b2 ϩ 2ab cos D

Vector Operations

1. Notation. Vector quantities are printed in boldface type, and
scalar quantities appear in lightface italic type. Thus, the vector
quantity V has a scalar magnitude V. In longhand work vector
quantities should always be consistently indicated by a symbol such
l
as V or V to distinguish them from scalar quantities.

Q

P

R
Q

2. Addition
Triangle addition P ϩ Q ϭ R
Parallelogram addition P ϩ Q ϭ R
Commutative law P ϩ Q ϭ Q ϩ P
Associative law P ϩ (Q ϩ R) ϭ (P ϩ Q) ϩ R

P
R
Q

P
P

3. Subtraction
P Ϫ Q ϭ P ϩ (ϪQ)

4. Unit vectors

P–Q

i, j, k
V ϭ Vxi ϩ Vy j ϩ Vzk

where

–Q

z
k

͉V ͉ ϭ V ϭ ΊVx2 ϩ Vy2 ϩ Vz2
kVz

V
y

5. Direction cosines l, m, n are the cosines of the angles between V
and the x-, y-, z-axes. Thus,
l ϭ Vx /V
so that
and

m ϭ Vy /V
V ϭ V(li ϩ mj ϩ nk)
l2

ϩ

m2

ϩ

n2

ϭ1

j

jVy

n ϭ Vz /V
iVx

i
x

Article C/7

Vector Operations

483

6. Dot or scalar product
Q

P ⅐ Q ϭ PQ cos ␪

θ

This product may be viewed as the magnitude of P multiplied by
the component Q cos ␪ of Q in the direction of P, or as the magnitude of Q multiplied by the component P cos ␪ of P in the direction
of Q.
Commutative law

P⅐Q ϭ Q⅐P

P

Q

Q
Q cos θ

θ

P cos θ

θ

P

P

From the deﬁnition of the dot product
i⅐i ϭ j⅐j ϭ k⅐k ϭ 1
i⅐j ϭ j⅐i ϭ i⅐k ϭ k⅐i ϭ j⅐k ϭ k⅐j ϭ 0
P ⅐ Q ϭ (Px i ϩ Py j ϩ Pz k) ⅐ (Qx i ϩ Qy j ϩ Qz k)
ϭ PxQx ϩ PyQy ϩ PzQz
P ⅐ P ϭ Px2 ϩ Py2 ϩ Pz2
It follows from the deﬁnition of the dot product that two vectors P and Q are perpendicular when their dot product vanishes,
P ⅐ Q ϭ 0.
The angle ␪ between two vectors P1 and P2 may be found from
their dot product expression P1 ⅐ P2 ϭ P1P2 cos ␪, which gives
cos ␪ ϭ

P1 ⅐ P2 P1xP2x ϩ P1yP2y ϩ P1zP2z
ϭ
ϭ l1l2 ϩ m1m2 ϩ n1n2
P1P2
P1P2

where l, m, n stand for the respective direction cosines of the vectors. It is also observed that two vectors are perpendicular to each
other when their direction cosines obey the relation l1l2 ϩ m1m2 ϩ
n1n2 ϭ 0.
Distributive law

θ

P ⅐ (Q ϩ R) ϭ P ⅐ Q ϩ P ⅐ R

P
Q

7. Cross or vector product. The cross product P ؋ Q of the two
vectors P and Q is deﬁned as a vector with a magnitude

P؋Q

͉P ؋ Q͉ ϭ PQ sin ␪

Q

and a direction speciﬁed by the right-hand rule as shown. Reversing
the vector order and using the right-hand rule give Q ؋ P ϭ
ϪP ؋ Q.
Distributive law

P ؋ (Q ϩ R) ϭ P ؋ Q ϩ P ؋ R

From the deﬁnition of the cross product, using a right-handed
coordinate system, we get
i؋jϭk
j ؋ i ϭ Ϫk

θ

j؋kϭi
k ؋ j ϭ Ϫi

k؋iϭj
i ؋ k ϭ Ϫj

i؋iϭj؋jϭk؋kϭ0

Q ؋ P = –P ؋ Q

P

484

Appendix C

Selected Topics of Mathematics

With the aid of these identities and the distributive law, the vector
product may be written
P ؋ Q ϭ (Px i ϩ Py j ϩ Pz k) ؋ (Qx i ϩ Qy j ϩ Qz k)
ϭ (PyQz Ϫ PzQy)i ϩ (PzQx Ϫ PxQz)j ϩ (PxQy Ϫ PyQx)k
The cross product may also be expressed by the determinant

ͯ

i
P ؋ Q ϭ Px
Qx

j
k
Py Pz
Qy Qz

ͯ

8. Additional relations
Triple scalar product (P ؋ Q) ⅐ R ϭ R ⅐ (P ؋ Q). The dot and cross
may be interchanged as long as the order of the vectors is maintained. Parentheses are unnecessary since P ؋ (Q ⅐ R) is meaningless because a vector P cannot be crossed into a scalar Q ⅐ R. Thus,
the expression may be written
P ؋ Q⅐R ϭ P⅐Q ؋ R
The triple scalar product has the determinant expansion

ͯ

Px
P ؋ Q ⅐ R ϭ Qx
Rx

Py Pz
Qy Qz
Ry Rz

ͯ

Triple vector product (P ؋ Q) ؋ R ϭ ϪR ؋ (P ؋ Q) ϭ R ؋
(Q ؋ P). Here we note that the parentheses must be used since an
expression P ؋ Q ؋ R would be ambiguous because it would not
identify the vector to be crossed. It may be shown that the triple
vector product is equivalent to
(P ؋ Q) ؋ R ϭ R ⅐ PQ Ϫ R ⅐ QP
or

P ؋ (Q ؋ R) ϭ P ⅐ RQ Ϫ P ⅐ QR

The ﬁrst term in the ﬁrst expression, for example, is the dot product R ⅐ P, a scalar, multiplied by the vector Q.
9. Derivatives of vectors obey the same rules as they do for scalars.
dP
˙ ˙
˙
˙
ϭ P ϭ Px i ϩ Py j ϩ Pz k
dt
d(Pu)
ϭ Pu ϩ Pu
˙ ˙
dt
d(P ⅐ Q)
˙ ˙
ϭ P⅐Q ϩ P⅐Q
dt
d(P ؋ Q)
˙ ˙
ϭP؋QϩP؋Q
dt

Article C/9

10. Integration of vectors. If V is a function of x, y, and z and an element of volume is d␶ ϭ dx dy dz, the integral of V over the volume
may be written as the vector sum of the three integrals of its components. Thus,

͵ V d␶ ϭ i ͵ V d␶ ϩ j ͵ V d␶ ϩ k ͵ V d␶
x

C/8

y

z

Series

(Expression in brackets following series indicates range of
convergence.)
n(n Ϫ 1) 2 n(n Ϫ 1)(n Ϫ 2) 3
x Ϯ
x ϩ ⅐ ⅐ ⅐ [x2 Ͻ 1]
(1 Ϯ x)n ϭ 1 Ϯ nx ϩ
2!
3!
sin x ϭ x Ϫ

x3 x5 x7
ϩ Ϫ ϩ⅐ ⅐ ⅐
3! 5! 7!

[x2 Ͻ ȍ]

cos x ϭ 1 Ϫ

x2 x4 x6
ϩ Ϫ ϩ⅐ ⅐ ⅐
2! 4! 6!

[x2 Ͻ ȍ]

sinh x ϭ

x3 x5 x7
ex Ϫ eϪx
ϭ x ϩ ϩ ϩ ϩ⅐ ⅐ ⅐
2
3! 5! 7!

[x2 Ͻ ȍ]

cosh x ϭ

x2 x4 x6
ex ϩ eϪx
ϭ 1 ϩ ϩ ϩ ϩ⅐ ⅐ ⅐
2
2! 4! 6!

[x2 Ͻ ȍ]

ƒ(x) ϭ

ȍ
ȍ
a0
n␲x
n␲x
ϩ ͚ an cos
ϩ ͚ bn sin
2
l
l
nϭ1
nϭ1

where an ϭ

1
l

͵

l

Ϫl

ƒ(x) cos

n␲x
dx,
l

bn ϭ

1
l

͵

l

Ϫl

ƒ(x) sin

n␲x
dx
l

[Fourier expansion for Ϫl Ͻ x Ͻ l]

C/9

Derivatives

dxn
ϭ nxnϪ1,
dx

d(uv)
dv
du,
ϭu
ϩv
dx
dx
dx

΂΃

u
d v
dx

v
ϭ

dv
du
Ϫu
dx
dx
v2

lim sin ⌬x ϭ sin dx ϭ tan dx ϭ dx

⌬xl0

lim cos ⌬x ϭ cos dx ϭ 1

⌬xl0

d sin x
ϭ cos x,
dx
d sinh x
ϭ cosh x,
dx

d cos x
ϭ Ϫsin x,
dx
d cosh x
ϭ sinh x,
dx

d tan x
ϭ sec2 x
dx
d tanh x
ϭ sech2 x
dx

Derivatives

485

486

Appendix C

C/10

͵x

n

Selected Topics of Mathematics

Integrals
xnϩ1
nϩ1

dx ϭ

͵ dx ϭ ln x
x
2
͵ Ίa ϩ bx dx ϭ 3bΊ(a ϩ bx)
2
͵ xΊa ϩ bx dx ϭ 15b

2

3

(3bx Ϫ 2a)Ί(a ϩ bx)3

2
͵ x Ίa ϩ bx dx ϭ 105b
2

(8a2 Ϫ 12abx ϩ 15b2x2)Ί(a ϩ bx)3

3

͵ Ίadx bx ϭ 2Ίabϩ bx
ϩ
ϩx
aϩx
͵ Ίa Ϫ x dx ϭ ϪΊa ϩ x Ίb Ϫ x ϩ (a ϩ b) sin Ίa ϩ b
Ίb
Ϫ1

͵ axϩdx ϭ b1 [a ϩ bx Ϫ a ln (a ϩ bx)]
bx
2

͵ (a xϩdx
bx)
dx
͵ a ϩ bx

͵ a xϩdx
bx

n

ϭ

2

ϭ

xΊab
1
tanϪ1 a
Ίab

2

ϭ

΃

1
ln (a ϩ bx2)
2b

͵ Ίx Ϯ a dx ϭ
2

΂

(a ϩ bx)1Ϫn a ϩ bx
a
Ϫ
2Ϫn
1Ϫn
b2

2

xΊϪab
1
tanhϪ1
a
ΊϪab

or

1
2
2
2
2
2
2 [xΊx Ϯ a Ϯ a ln (x ϩ Ίx Ϯ a )]

x
͵ Ίa Ϫ x dx ϭ ΂x Ίa Ϫ x ϩ a sin a΃
͵ xΊa Ϫ x dx ϭ Ϫ Ί(a Ϫ x )
2

1
2

2

2

2

1
3

2

2

2

Ϫ1

2

2 3

x
x
͵ x Ίa Ϫ x dx ϭ Ϫ4Ί(a Ϫ x ) ϩ a8 ΂xΊa Ϫ x ϩ a sin a΃
͵ x Ίa Ϫ x dx ϭ Ϫ (x ϩ a )Ί(a Ϫ x )
2

2

2

3

2

2

2

1
5

2

2

2 3

2 2
3

2

2

2 3

2

2

Ϫ1

Article C/10

͵ Ίa ϩ dx ϩcx
bx

2

ϭ

΂

1
b
ln Ίa ϩ bx ϩ cx2 ϩ xΊc ϩ
Ίc
2Ίc

͵ Ίx dx a
Ϯ

x
ϭ sinϪ1 a

͵ Ίxx dx a
Ϫ

ϭ Ίx2 Ϫ a2

͵ Ίax dx x
Ϯ

΂

b ϩ 2cx
Ϫ1
sinϪ1
ΊϪc
Ίb2 Ϫ 4ac

or

ϭ ln (x ϩ Ίx2 Ϯ a2)

͵ Ίa dx x
Ϫ

΃

ϭ ϮΊa2 Ϯ x2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

͵ xΊx Ϯ a dx ϭ
2

2

1
Ί(x2 Ϯ a2)3
3

x
͵ x Ίx Ϯ a dx ϭ 4Ί(x Ϯ a ) ϯ a8 xΊx Ϯ a Ϫ a8 ln (x ϩ Ίx Ϯ a )
2

2

2

2

͵ sin x dx ϭ Ϫcos x
͵ cos x dx ϭ sin x
1 ϩ sin
1
͵ sec x dx ϭ 2 ln 1 Ϫ sin x
x
x
͵ sin x dx ϭ 2 Ϫ sin42x
2

x
͵ cos x dx ϭ 2 ϩ sin42x
2

͵ sin x cos x dx ϭ sin2 x
2

͵ sinh x dx ϭ cosh x
͵ cosh x dx ϭ sinh x
͵ tanh x dx ϭ ln cosh x
͵ ln x dx ϭ x ln x Ϫ x

2 3

2

2

2

4

2

2

΃

Integrals

487

488

Appendix C

͵e

dx ϭ

ax

͵ xe

ax

Selected Topics of Mathematics

eax
a

dx ϭ

eax
(ax Ϫ 1)
a2

͵e

sin px dx ϭ

͵e

cos px dx ϭ

͵e

sin2 x dx ϭ

eax
2
a sin2 x Ϫ sin 2x ϩ a
4 ϩ a2

͵e

cos2 x dx ϭ

eax
2
a cos2 x ϩ sin 2x ϩ a
4 ϩ a2

͵e

sin x cos x dx ϭ

ax

ax

ax

ax

ax

eax (a sin px Ϫ p cos px)
a2 ϩ p2
eax (a cos px ϩ p sin px)
a2 ϩ p2

΂

΃

΂

΃

΂

eax
a
sin 2x Ϫ cos 2x
4 ϩ a2 2

͵ sin x dx ϭ Ϫcos x (2 ϩ sin x)
3
3

2

͵ cos x dx ϭ sin x (2 ϩ cos x)
3
3

͵ cos x dx ϭ sin x Ϫ
5

2

2
sin3 x ϩ 1 sin5 x
3
5

͵ x sin x dx ϭ sin x Ϫ x cos x
͵ x cos x dx ϭ cos x ϩ x sin x
͵ x sin x dx ϭ 2x sin x Ϫ (x Ϫ 2) cos x
2

2

͵ x cos x dx ϭ 2x cos x ϩ (x Ϫ 2) sin x
2

2

΃

Article C/11

Newton’s Method for Solving Intractable Equations

C/11 Newton’s Method for Solving
Intractable Equations
Frequently, the application of the fundamental principles of mechanics leads to an algebraic or transcendental equation which is not
solvable (or easily solvable) in closed form. In such cases, an iterative
technique, such as Newton’s method, can be a powerful tool for obtaining a good estimate to the root or roots of the equation.
Let us place the equation to be solved in the form ƒ(x) ϭ 0. Part a of
the accompanying ﬁgure depicts an arbitrary function ƒ(x) for values of
x in the vicinity of the desired root xr. Note that xr is merely the value

ƒ(x)
ƒ(x)
ƒ(x)

ƒ(x)

Tangent to
ƒ(x) at x = x1

xr

x3

x2

x1

xr1

x

xr2
x1

(a)

x2

x

(b)

of x at which the function crosses the x-axis. Suppose that we have available (perhaps via a hand-drawn plot) a rough estimate x1 of this root.
Provided that x1 does not closely correspond to a maximum or minimum
value of the function ƒ(x), we may obtain a better estimate of the root xr
by extending the tangent to ƒ(x) at x1 so that it intersects the x-axis at
x2. From the geometry of the ﬁgure, we may write
ƒ(x1)
tan ␪ ϭ ƒЈ(x1) ϭ x Ϫ x
1
2
where ƒЈ(x1) denotes the derivative of ƒ(x) with respect to x evaluated at
x ϭ x1. Solving the above equation for x2 results in
x2 ϭ x1 Ϫ

ƒ(x1)
ƒЈ(x1)

The term Ϫƒ(x1)/ƒЈ(x1) is the correction to the initial root estimate x1.
Once x2 is calculated, we may repeat the process to obtain x3, and so
forth.
Thus, we generalize the above equation to
xkϩ1 ϭ xk Ϫ

ƒ(xk)
ƒЈ(xk)

x2

xr

(c)

x1

x

489

490

Appendix C

Selected Topics of Mathematics

where
xkϩ1 ϭ the (k ϩ 1)th estimate of the desired root xr
xk ϭ the kth estimate of the desired root xr
ƒ(xk) ϭ the function ƒ(x) evaluated at x ϭ xk
ƒЈ(xk) ϭ the function derivative evaluated at x ϭ xk
This equation is repeatedly applied until ƒ(xkϩ1) is sufﬁciently close to
zero and xkϩ1 ഡ xk. The student should verify that the equation is valid
for all possible sign combinations of xk, ƒ(xk), and ƒЈ(xk).
Several cautionary notes are in order:

1. Clearly, ƒЈ(xk) must not be zero or close to zero. This would mean,
as restricted above, that xk exactly or approximately corresponds to
a minimum or maximum of ƒ(x). If the slope ƒЈ(xk) is zero, then the
tangent to the curve never intersects the x-axis. If the slope ƒЈ(xk) is
small, then the correction to xk may be so large that xkϩ1 is a worse
root estimate than xk. For this reason, experienced engineers usually limit the size of the correction term; that is, if the absolute
value of ƒ(xk)/ƒЈ(xk) is larger than a preselected maximum value,
that maximum value is used.
2. If there are several roots of the equation ƒ(x) ϭ 0, we must be in the
vicinity of the desired root xr in order that the algorithm actually
converges to that root. Part b of the ﬁgure depicts the condition
when the initial estimate x1 will result in convergence to xr2 rather
than xr1.
3. Oscillation from one side of the root to the other can occur if, for
example, the function is antisymmetric about a root which is an
inﬂection point. The use of one-half of the correction will usually
prevent this behavior, which is depicted in part c of the accompanying ﬁgure.
Example: Beginning with an initial estimate of x1 ϭ 5, estimate the single root of the equation ex Ϫ 10 cos x Ϫ 100 ϭ 0.
The table below summarizes the application of Newton’s method to
the given equation. The iterative process was terminated when the absolute value of the correction Ϫƒ(xk)/ƒЈ(xk) became less than 10Ϫ6.

Article C/12

Selected Techniques for Numerical Integration

C/12 Selected Techniques for
Numerical Integration
1. Area determination. Consider the problem of determining the
shaded area under the curve y ϭ ƒ(x) from x ϭ a to x ϭ b, as depicted in
part a of the ﬁgure, and suppose that analytical integration is not feasible. The function may be known in tabular form from experimental
measurements or it may be known in analytical form. The function is
taken to be continuous within the interval a Ͻ x Ͻ b. We may divide the
area into n vertical strips, each of width ⌬x ϭ (b Ϫ a)/n, and then add
the areas of all strips to obtain A ϭ ͐ y dx. A representative strip of area
Ai is shown with darker shading in the ﬁgure. Three useful numerical
approximations are cited. In each case the greater the number of strips,
the more accurate becomes the approximation geometrically. As a general rule, one can begin with a relatively small number of strips and
increase the number until the resulting changes in the area approximation no longer improve the accuracy obtained.

y

y = ƒ(x)

yn
yn – 1

Ai

yi + 1

yi
y0
(a)

y1

x0
=a

x1

y2
x2

y3

x

x3

xi

xi + 1

xn
=b

x

Rectangular
yi

(b)

Ai

Ai = ym x
yi + 1

ym A = y dx

ym x

x

I. Rectangular [Figure (b)] The areas of the strips are taken to be
rectangles, as shown by the representative strip whose height ym is chosen visually so that the small cross-hatched areas are as nearly equal as
possible. Thus, we form the sum Σym of the effective heights and multiply by ⌬x. For a function known in analytical form, a value for ym equal
to that of the function at the midpoint xi ϩ ⌬x/2 may be calculated and
used in the summation.
II. Trapezoidal [Figure (c)] The areas of the strips are taken to be
trapezoids, as shown by the representative strip. The area Ai is the average

491

492

Appendix C

Selected Topics of Mathematics

height (yi ϩ yi ϩ 1)/2 times ⌬x. Adding the areas gives the area approximation as tabulated. For the example with the curvature shown, clearly the
approximation will be on the low side. For the reverse curvature, the approximation will be on the high side.

yi

Ai

Trapezoidal
yi + yi + 1
Ai = –——––– Δ x
2
y0
yn
A = y dx — + y1 + y2 + … + yn – 1 + — Δ x
2
2
yi + 1

(

)

Δx

(c)

Parabolic
ΔA
yi + 1

yi

(d)

Δx

1
Δ A = –– ( yi + 4yi + 1 + yi + 2)Δ x
3
1
A = y dx –– ( y0 + 4y1 + 2y2 + 4y3 + 2y4
yi + 2
3
+ … + 2yn – 2 + 4yn – 1 + yn)Δ x

Δx

III. Parabolic [Figure (d)] The area between the chord and the
curve (neglected in the trapezoidal solution) may be accounted for by
approximating the function by a parabola passing through the points
deﬁned by three successive values of y. This area may be calculated from
the geometry of the parabola and added to the trapezoidal area of the
pair of strips to give the area ⌬A of the pair as cited. Adding all of the
⌬A’s produces the tabulation shown, which is known as Simpson’s rule.
To use Simpson’s rule, the number n of strips must be even.
Example: Determine the area under the curve y ϭ x Ί1 ϩ x2 from x ϭ 0
to x ϭ 2. (An integrable function is chosen here so that the three
approximations can be compared with the exact value, which is
2
2
A ϭ ͐0 x Ί1 ϩ x2 dx ϭ 1(1 ϩ x2)3/2͉ 0 ϭ 1(5Ί5 Ϫ 1) ϭ 3.393 447).
3
3

Article C/12

Selected Techniques for Numerical Integration

Note that the worst approximation error is less than 2 percent, even
with only four strips.
2. Integration of ﬁrst-order ordinary differential equations.
The application of the fundamental principles of mechanics frequently
results in differential relationships. Let us consider the ﬁrst-order form
dy/dt ϭ ƒ(t), where the function ƒ(t) may not be readily integrable or
may be known only in tabular form. We may numerically integrate by
means of a simple slope-projection technique, known as Euler integration, which is illustrated in the ﬁgure.

dy
Slope –– = ƒ(t)
dt
y(t)

y(t)

Slope = ƒ(t3)

Accumulated
algorithmic
error

Slope = ƒ(t2)
Slope = ƒ(t1)

y4
y3

y1

t1

etc.

y2

t2

t3

t4

t

Beginning at t1, at which the value y1 is known, we project the slope
over a horizontal subinterval or step (t2 Ϫ t1) and see that y2 ϭ y1 ϩ
ƒ(t1)(t2 Ϫ t1). At t2, the process may be repeated beginning at y2, and so
forth until the desired value of t is reached. Hence, the general expression is
ykϩ1 ϭ yk ϩ ƒ(tk)(tkϩ1 Ϫ tk)
If y versus t were linear, i.e., if ƒ(t) were constant, the method would
be exact, and there would be no need for a numerical approach in that
case. Changes in the slope over the subinterval introduce error. For the
case shown in the ﬁgure, the estimate y2 is clearly less than the true
value of the function y(t) at t2. More accurate integration techniques
(such as Runge-Kutta methods) take into account changes in the slope
over the subinterval and thus provide better results.
As with the area-determination techniques, experience is helpful in
the selection of a subinterval or step size when dealing with analytical
functions. As a rough rule, one begins with a relatively large step size
and then steadily decreases the step size until the corresponding
changes in the integrated result are much smaller than the desired accuracy. A step size which is too small, however, can result in increased
error due to a very large number of computer operations. This type of
error is generally known as “round-off error,” while the error which results from a large step size is known as algorithm error.

493

494

Appendix C

Selected Topics of Mathematics

Example: For the differential equation dy/dt ϭ 5t with the initial condition y ϭ 2 when t ϭ 0, determine the value of y for t ϭ 4.
Application of the Euler integration technique yields the following
results:

Useful Tables

D

Coefﬁcients of friction
(The coefﬁcients in the following table represent typical values under normal
working conditions. Actual coefﬁcients for a given situation will depend on the
exact nature of the contacting surfaces. A variation of 25 to 100 percent or more
from these values could be expected in an actual application, depending on prevailing conditions of cleanliness, surface ﬁnish, pressure, lubrication, and velocity.)

495

496

Appendix D

TABLE D/2

Useful Tables

SOLAR SYSTEM CONSTANTS
Universal gravitational constant
Mass of Earth
Period of Earth’s rotation (1 sidereal day)
Angular velocity of Earth
Mean angular velocity of Earth–Sun line
Mean velocity of Earth’s center about Sun

BODY
Sun

MEAN
DISTANCE
TO SUN
km (mi)

ECCENTRICITY
OF ORBIT
e

PERIOD
OF ORBIT
solar days

—

—

—

0.055

27.32

0.206

87.97

0.0068

224.70

0.0167

365.26

0.093

686.98

0.0489

4333

384 3981
(238 854)1
Mercury
57.3 ϫ 106
(35.6 ϫ 106)
Venus
108 ϫ 106
(67.2 ϫ 106)
Earth
149.6 ϫ 106
(92.96 ϫ 106)
Mars
227.9 ϫ 106
(141.6 ϫ 106)
4
Jupiter
778 ϫ 106
(483 ϫ 106)

Moon

1
2

3
4

G ϭ 6.673(10Ϫ11) m3/(kg ⅐ s2)
ϭ 3.439(10Ϫ8) ft4/(lbf-s4)
me ϭ 5.976(1024) kg
ϭ 4.095(1023) lbf-s2/ft
ϭ 23 h 56 min 4 s
ϭ 23.9344 h
␻ ϭ 0.7292(10Ϫ4) rad/s
␻Ј ϭ 0.1991(10Ϫ6) rad/s
ϭ 107 200 km/h
ϭ 66,610 mi/h

MEAN
DIAMETER
km (mi)
1 392 000
(865 000)
3 476
(2 160)
5 000
(3 100)
12 400
(7 700)
2
12 742)
(7 918)2
6 788
(4 218)
139 822
86 884

MASS
RELATIVE
TO EARTH
333 000
0.0123
0.054
0.815
1.000
0.107
317.8

SURFACE
GRAVITATIONAL
ACCELERATION
m/s2 (ft/s2)

ESCAPE
VELOCITY
km/s (mi/s)

274
(898)
1.62
(5.32)
3.47
(11.4)
8.44
(27.7)
9.8213
(32.22)3
3.73
(12.3)
24.79
(81.3)

616
(383)
2.37
(1.47)
4.17
(2.59)
10.24
(6.36)
11.18
(6.95)
5.03
(3.13)
59.5
(36.8)

Mean distance to Earth (center-to-center)
Diameter of sphere of equal volume, based on a spheroidal Earth with a polar diameter of 12 714 km (7900 mi) and an
equatorial diameter of 12 756 km (7926 mi)
For nonrotating spherical Earth, equivalent to absolute value at sea level and latitude 37.5Њ
Note that Jupiter is not a solid body.

Useful Tables
TABLE D/3

PROPERTIES OF PLANE FIGURES
CENTROID

r
α –
α r

Arc Segment

—

– = ––
2r
y
␲

C

AREA MOMENTS
OF INERTIA

– = ––––––
r sin α
r
α

FIGURE

—

Quarter and Semicircular Arcs
C

C

–
y

r

y

r
Circular Area

—
x

C

4
Iz = ␲ r
–––
2

␲ r4
Ix = Iy = –––
8

y

Semicircular
Area

– = ––
4r
y
3␲

C
–
y

r

–
x C
–
y

– = – = ––
4r
x
y
3␲

–
–
␲
4
Ix = Iy = — – –– r4
16 9␲

(

)

4
Iz = ␲ r
–––
8

x

r4
Ix = –– (α – 1 sin 2α )
–
2
4

y

Area of Circular
Sector

)

(

␲ r4
Ix = Iy = –––
16

y

r

–
␲
8
Ix = – – –– r4
8
9␲
r4
Iz = ␲
–––
4

x

Quarter-Circular
Area

␲ r4
Ix = Iy = –––
4

r
α –
α x

x
C

– = 2 ––––––
x – r sin α
α
3

r4
Iy = –– (α + 1 sin 2α )
–
2
4
Iz = 1 r4α
–
2

497

498

Appendix D

TABLE D/3

Useful Tables

PROPERTIES OF PLANE FIGURES
FIGURE

CENTROID

y0
C

h

—

x0
x

x1

a
–
x

C
–
y
b

y

Area of Elliptical
Quadrant

–
x

b

a+b
– = ––––
x
3

h
x

h
– = ––
y
3

– = 4a
x
––
3␲
– = 4b
y
––
3␲

C
–
y

x

a
Subparabolic Area
b
2
— 2
y y = kx = a2 x
Area A = ab
––
3

–
x

C b
–
y
a

– = 3a
x
––
4
– = 3b
y
––
10
x

Parabolic Area
y
a
Area A = 2ab
–––
3

b

–
x

b
y = kx2 = — x2
a2

C
–
y

– = 3a
x
––
8
– = 3b
y
––
5

x

–
bh3
Ix = –––
12
–
bh
Iz = –– (b2 + h2)
12

b

Triangular Area

AREA MOMENTS
OF INERTIA
bh3
Ix = –––
3

Rectangular Area

y

Continued

bh3
Ix = –––
12
–
bh3
Ix = –––
36
bh3
Ix1 = –––
4

␲
4
ab3 –
Ix = ␲
––––, Ix = –– – –– ab3
16 9␲
16

(
(

)
)

–
a3
␲
4
Iy = ␲ b Iy = –– – –– a3b
––––,
16
16 9␲

␲ ab
Iz = ––– (a2 + b2)
16

ab3
Ix = –––
21
a3b
Iy = –––
5
a3 b2
Iz = ab –– + ––
5 21

(

)

2ab3
Ix = ––––
7
2a3b
Iy = ––––
15
a2 b2
Iz = 2ab –– + ––
15 7

(

)

Useful Tables
TABLE D/4 PROPERTIES OF HOMOGENEOUS SOLIDS
(m ϭ mass of body shown)

MASS
CENTER

BODY
l
–
2

l
–
2

1
Ixx ϭ 1 mr2 ϩ 12 ml2
2

r
G

z

y

Circular
Cylindrical
Shell

—

1

1

Ix1x1 ϭ 2 mr2 ϩ 3 ml2
Izz ϭ mr2

x

x1

MASS MOMENTS
OF INERTIA

Ixx ϭ Iyy
1
ϭ 1 mr2 ϩ 12 ml2
2

l
–
2

l
–
2

G

z r

y

y1

Half
Cylindrical
Shell

Ix1x1 ϭ Iy1 y1
2r
xϭ ␲

΂

Izz ϭ 1 Ϫ
l
–
2

l
–
2

΃

4
mr2
␲2

1
Ixx ϭ 1 mr2 ϩ 12 ml2
4

r

Circular
Cylinder

G

z

1

Izz ϭ mr2

x

x1

1

ϭ 2 mr2 ϩ 3 ml2

—

Ix1x1 ϭ 1 mr2 ϩ 1 ml2
4
3
1

Izz ϭ 2 mr2

x

x1

Ixx ϭ Iyy
1
ϭ 1 mr2 ϩ 12 ml2
4

l
–
2

l
–
2

Ix1x1 ϭ Iy1y1

G

z r

Semicylinder
y

y1

4r
xϭ
3␲

Izz ϭ 1 mr2
2

x

x1

ϭ 1 mr2 ϩ 1 ml2
4
3

Izz ϭ

1
1

Iyy ϭ 12 m(b2 ϩ l2)
Rectangular
Parallelepiped

b
G

z
a

y

y1

y2

x

2

2

Ixx ϭ 12 m(a2 ϩ l2)

l
–
2

l
–
2

16
΂1 Ϫ 9␲ ΃ mr
2

—

1
Izz ϭ 12 m(a2 ϩ b2)
1
Iy1 y1 ϭ 12 mb2 ϩ 1 ml2
3
1

Iy2 y2 ϭ 3 m(b2 ϩ l2)

499

500

Appendix D

Useful Tables

TABLE D/4 PROPERTIES OF HOMOGENEOUS SOLIDS
(m ϭ mass of body shown)

MASS
CENTER

BODY

G
z

Spherical
Shell

r

Continued

MASS MOMENTS
OF INERTIA

—

Izz

2
mr2
3

r

2
mr2
3

Ixx

G

z

y

Hemispherical
Shell

r
2

x

Iyy

Izz

Iyy

Izz

5
2
12mr

x

G

Izz

2
mr2
5

Ixx

Iyy

Izz

Iyy

Sphere

z

Izz

83
mr2
320

Iyy

1
2
12 ml

—

r

r
G

z

y

Hemisphere

x

3r
8

x

2
mr2
5

l
–
2

l
–
2

Uniform
Slender Rod

G
y1

y

—

Iy1 y1

1
ml2
3

Useful Tables
TABLE D/4 PROPERTIES OF HOMOGENEOUS SOLIDS
(m ϭ mass of body shown)

MASS
CENTER

BODY

Continued

MASS MOMENTS
OF INERTIA

x
_
y

x

y

1
2
2mr

_ G
x
r
y

Ixx

Iyy

Izz

QuarterCircular Rod

mr2

2r

z
l
–
2

l
–
2

Ixx

a
y

y1

1
2
12ml

1
2
4m(a

b2)

1
2
4mb

1 2
ml
3

1
2
4mr

1
2
2mh

Iy1y1

1
2
4mr

1
2
6mh

Izz

1
2
2mr
1
2
4mr

Ixx

—

1
2
4mb

Iyy

G

z

Iyy
Izz

Elliptical
Cylinder

1
2
12ml

Iyy

b

1
2
4ma

Iyy

Iy1y1

x

r
G
z
y

h

Conical
Shell

z

2h
3

y1

1
2
4 mr

x
z

G
x1

y

h

r

y1

Half
Conical
Shell

Ix1x1

2h
3

Izz
Izz

1
2
2 mh

Iy1y1
1
2
4 mr

z

x

4r
3

1
2
18mh

1
2
6 mh

1
2
2 mr

1
2

16
mr2
9 2

Iyy

r
G
z
h
y1

y

Right
Circular
Cone

z

3h
4

3
2
20 mr

3
mh2
5

Iy1y1

3
2
20 mr

1
2
10 mh

Izz

3
2
10 mr

Iyy

3
2
20 mr

3
2
80 mh

501

502

Appendix D

Useful Tables

TABLE D/4 PROPERTIES OF HOMOGENEOUS SOLIDS
(m ϭ mass of body shown)

MASS
CENTER

BODY

Continued

MASS MOMENTS
OF INERTIA
Ixx ϭ Iyy
3

3

ϭ 20 mr2 ϩ 5 mh2
z

G
x1

Half Cone
y

h

r

y1

r
xϭ␲
3h
zϭ
4

x

Ix1x1 ϭ Iy1y1
3

1
ϭ 20 mr2 ϩ 10 mh2
3

Izz ϭ 10 mr2
Izz ϭ

x2 y2 z2
— + — + — =1
a2 b2 c2

x

3
΂10 Ϫ ␲1 ΃ mr

2

2

1

Ixx ϭ 5m(b2 ϩ c2)
1

Iyy ϭ 5m(a2 ϩ c2)
a

z

G

zϭ

3c
8

1

Izz ϭ 5m(a2 ϩ b2)
19

1

b

Ixx ϭ 5m(b2 ϩ 64c2)

c
y

Ixx ϭ 1mb2 ϩ 1mc2
2
6

z
x2 y2
—+— = –
c
a2 b2
b

19

Iyy ϭ 1m(a2 ϩ 64c2)
5

Semiellipsoid

1

y

1

Iyy ϭ 6ma2 ϩ 2mc2
Elliptic
Paraboloid

G

z

zϭ

2c
3

1

Izz ϭ 6m(a2 ϩ b2)
1

1

Ixx ϭ 6m(b2 ϩ 3c2)

a
c

x

Iyy ϭ 1m(a2 ϩ 1c2)
6
3
1

Ixx ϭ 10m(b2 ϩ c2)

z

a
4
b
yϭ
4
c
zϭ
4

xϭ
c
G

x

a

Rectangular
Tetrahedron

b
y

1
Iyy ϭ 10m(a2 ϩ c2)
1

Izz ϭ 10m(a2 ϩ b2)
3

Ixx ϭ 80m(b2 ϩ c2)
3

Iyy ϭ 80m(a2 ϩ c2)
3

Izz ϭ 80m(a2 ϩ b2)
z

x

Half Torus

G
y

a
R

R

a2 ϩ 4R2
xϭ
2␲R

5

Ixx ϭ Iyy ϭ 1mR2 ϩ 8ma2
2
3

Izz ϭ mR2 ϩ 4ma2

Index
Absolute system of units, 10
Acceleration, of a body, 8, 121
due to gravity, 11
Accuracy, 13
Action and reaction, principle of, 8, 25, 110, 173, 204, 225, 279
Active force, 402
Active-force diagram, 403
Addition of vectors, 6, 25, 28, 482
Aerostatics, 306
Angle, of friction, 339
of repose, 342
Approximations, 14, 254
Archimedes, 3
Area, ﬁrst moment of, 238
second moment of, 238, 441
Area moments of inertia, see Moments of inertia of areas
Atmospheric pressure, 307
Axes, choice of, 27, 68, 114, 179, 237, 240
rotation of, 465
Axis, moment, 38, 74
Beams, concentrated loads on, 273
deﬁnition of, 272
distributed loads on, 273
external effects, 273
internal effects, 279
loading-shear relation for, 280, 281
resultant of forces on cross section of, 279
shear-moment relation for, 280, 281, 284
statically determinate and indeterminate, 272
types of, 272
Bearing friction, 368
Belt friction, 377
Bending moment, 279
Bending-moment diagram, 280
Bodies, interconnected, 204, 402
Body, deformable, 5
rigid, 4
Body force, 24, 234
Boundary conditions, 293
British system of units, 9
Buoyancy, center of, 312
force of, 312
principle of, 311
Cables, catenary, 295
ﬂexible, 291
length of, 294, 297
parabolic, 293
tension in, 294, 297
Cajori, F., 7
Center, of buoyancy, 312
of gravity, 25, 235
of mass, 235, 237
of pressure, 308
Centroids, 238
of composite ﬁgures, 254
by integration, 238

of irregular volumes, 255
table of, 497
by theorems of Pappus, 264
Coefﬁcient, of friction, 338, 339, 495
of rolling resistance, 378
Collinear forces, equilibrium of, 121
Components, of a force, 26, 27, 28
rectangular, 6, 26, 27, 28, 66
scalar, 27
of a vector, 6, 26, 27, 28, 66
Composite areas, moment of inertia of, 456
Composite bodies, center of mass of, 254
Composite ﬁgures, centroid of, 254
Compression in truss members, 175, 178
Computer-oriented problems, 17, 104, 168, 229, 331, 392,
438, 475
Concentrated forces, 24, 233
on beams, 273
Concurrent forces, equilibrium of, 121, 146
resultant of, 25, 28, 59, 89
Cone of friction, 340
Constant of gravitation, 12, 496
Constraint, 124, 148
adequacy of, 125, 149
partial, 149
proper and improper, 125
redundant, 126, 149
Coordinates, choice of, 27, 67, 114, 240, 325, 443
Coplanar forces, equilibrium of, 121, 122
resultant of, 28, 58
Coulomb, 336
Couple, 50, 76
equivalent, 50
moment of, 50, 76
resolution of, 51, 89
resultant, 58, 88, 89
vector representation of, 50, 76
work of, 399
Cross or vector product, 39, 74, 483
D’Alembert, J., 3
da Vinci, 3
Deformable body, 4
Degrees of freedom, 404, 422, 433
Density, 237, 495
Derivative of vector, 484
Derivatives, table of, 485
Diagram, active-force, 403, 419
bending-moment, 280
free-body, 16, 110, 114, 146
shear-force, 280
Differential element, choice of, 239
Differentials, order of, 13, 239, 325
Dimensions, homogeneity of, 17
Direction cosines, 7, 66
Disk friction, 369
Displacement, 398
virtual, 400

503

504

Index

Distributed forces, 24, 233, 234, 325, 326
on beams, 273
Distributive laws, 40, 483
Dot or scalar product, 67, 398, 483
Dynamics, 4, 8
Efﬁciency, mechanical, 405
Elastic potential energy, 417
Energy, criterion for equilibrium, 422
criterion for stability, 422
elastic, 417
potential, 417, 419, 421
Equilibrium, alternative equations of, 123
categories of, 121, 146
of collinear forces, 121
of concurrent forces, 121, 146
condition of, 58, 121, 145, 401, 403
of coplanar forces, 121, 122
energy criterion for, 421, 422
equations of, 121, 145
of interconnected rigid bodies, 204, 402
of machines, 204
necessary and sufﬁcient conditions for, 121, 145
neutral, 421
of parallel forces, 121, 148
of a particle, 401
of a rigid body, 401
stability of, 125, 421
with two degrees of freedom, 404
by virtual work, 400, 401, 403
Euler, 3
External effects of force, 24
First moment of area, 238
Fixed vector, 5, 24
Flexible cables, 291
differential equation for, 292
Fluids, 306
friction in, 336
incompressible, 307
pressure in, 306
Foot, 9
Force, action of, 23, 111, 112, 146, 147
active, 402
body, 24, 234
buoyancy, 312
components of, 26, 27, 66
concentrated, 24, 233
concept of, 4
contact, 24
coplanar system of, 58
distributed, 24, 233, 234, 325, 326
effects of, 23
external, 24
friction, 113, 335
gravitational, 12, 25, 113, 234
inertia, 442
intensity of, 234
internal, 24, 234, 279, 403
kinds of, 24
magnetic, 24, 113
measurement of, 25
mechanical action of, 111, 112, 147
moment of, 38, 74
polygon, 58, 123
reactive, 24, 402
remote action of, 113
resolution of, 26, 27, 66, 67
resultant, 58, 88, 89, 235, 325
shear, 279, 306

speciﬁcations of, 24
unit of, 9
work of, 398
Force–couple system, 51, 58, 77
Force system, concurrent, 59, 76, 89, 121, 146
coplanar, 58
general, 23, 89
parallel, 26, 59, 89
Formulation of problems, 14
Frames, deﬁned, 204, 225
equilibrium of, 204
Frames and machines, rigidity of, 204
Free-body diagram, 16, 110, 114, 146
Freedom, degrees of, 404, 422, 433
Free vector, 5, 6, 50, 76
Friction, angle of, 339
bearing, 368, 369
belt, 377
circle of, 368
coefﬁcients of, 338, 339, 495
cone of, 340
disk, 369
dry or Coulomb, 336, 337
ﬂuid, 336
internal, 336
journal bearing, 368
kinetic, 338
limiting, 338
in machines, 357
mechanism of, 337
pivot, 369
problems in dry friction, 341, 387
rolling, 378
screw thread, 358
static, 338
types of, 336
wedge, 357
work of, 404
Gage pressure, 307
Galileo, 3
Gas, 306
Graphical representation, 15, 25, 26, 58
Gravitation, constant of, 12, 496
law of, 12
Gravitational force, 12, 25, 113, 234
Gravitational potential energy, 418
Gravitational system of units, 10
Gravity, acceleration due to, 11
center of, 25, 235
Guldin, Paul, 264
Gyration, radius of, 443
Homogeneity, dimensional, 17
Hydrostatic pressure, 307, 309, 310
Hydrostatics, 306
Hyperbolic functions, 296
Ideal systems, 402
Impending motion, 338, 340, 341
Inclined axes, area moments of inertia about, 465
Inertia, 4, 442
area moments of, see Moments of inertia of areas
principal axes of, 466
products of, 464
Inertia force, 442
Integrals, table of selected, 486
Integration, choice of element for, 240, 325
numerical techniques for, 491, 493
of vectors, 485

Index
Interconnected bodies, 204, 402
Internal effects of force, 24, 234, 279, 403
Internal friction, 336
International System of units, 9
Joints, method of, 176, 198, 224
Joule, 400
Journal bearings, friction in, 368
Kilogram, 9, 10, 12
Kilopound, 10
Kinetic friction, 338
coefﬁcient of, 339, 495
Lagrange, 3
Laplace, 3
Law, associative, 482
commutative, 482, 483
of cosines, 482
distributive, 40, 483
of gravitation, 12
parallelogram, 6, 25, 58
of sines, 482
Pascal’s, 306
triangle, 6, 25
Laws of motion, Newton’s, 7
Length, standard unit of, 10
Limit, mathematical, 14
Line of action, 24
Liquids, 307
Loading-shear relation for beams, 280, 281
Mach, Ernst, 40
Machines, deﬁned, 204, 225
equilibrium of, 204
friction in, 357
ideal or real, 336
Mass, 4, 10
center of, 235, 237
unit of, 9, 10
Mathematical limit, 13
Mathematical model, 15
Mathematics, selected topics in, 479
Mechanical efﬁciency, 405
Mechanical system, 110
Mechanics, 3
Metacenter, 313
Metacentric height, 313
Meter, 10
Method, of joints, 176, 198, 224
of problem solution, 16, 99, 114, 163, 224, 325, 387, 433
of sections, 188, 198, 224
of virtual work, 397
Metric units, 9
Minimum energy, principle of, 405
Mohr’s circle, 469
Moment, bending, 279
components of, 75
of a couple, 50, 76
of a force, 38, 74
torsional, 279, 442
units of, 38
vector representation of, 39, 74
Moment arm, 38
Moment axis, 38, 74
Moments, principle of, 59, 88, 235, 241, 325
Moments of inertia of areas, 441
for composite areas, 456
dimensions and units of, 443
about inclined axes, 465
by integration, 442

505

maximum and minimum, 466, 467
Mohr’s circle representation of, 467
polar, 443
principal axes of, 466
radius of gyration for, 443
rectangular, 442
table of, 497
tabular computation of, 456
transfer of axes for, 444, 464
Morin, 336
Motion, impending, 338, 340, 341
Multi-force members, 204
Neutral equilibrium, 421
Newton, Isaac, 3
Newton’s laws, 7
Newton (unit), 9
Newton’s method, 489
Numerical integration, 491, 493
Order of differentials, 13, 239, 325
Pappus, 264
theorems of, 264
Parallel-axis theorems, for area moments of inertia, 445
Parallel forces, equilibrium of, 121, 148
resultant of, 26, 59, 89
Parallelogram law, 6, 25, 58
Particle, 4
Particles, equilibrium of, 401
Pascal (unit), 234
Pascal’s law, 306
Pivot friction, 369
Polar moment of inertia, 443
Polygon, of forces, 58, 123
Potential energy, 417, 419, 421
datum for, 418
units of, 418, 419
Pound, standard, 10
Pound force, 9
Pound mass, 10
Pressure, 234, 306
atmospheric, 307
center of, 308
ﬂuid, 306
gage, 307
hydrostatic, 307, 309, 310
on submerged surfaces, 307, 309, 310
Principal axes of inertia, 466
Principia, 7
Principle, of action and reaction, 8, 25, 110, 173, 204,
225, 279
of buoyancy, 311
of concurrency of forces, 122
of minimum energy, 421
of moments, 59, 88, 235, 241, 325
of transmissibility, 5, 24, 58
of virtual work, 401, 403, 420
Products of inertia, 464
about inclined axes, 465
Products of vectors, 39, 67, 74, 75, 398, 483
Radius of gyration, 443
Reactive forces, 24, 402
Rectangular components, 6, 26, 27, 28, 66
Rectangular moments of inertia, 442
Redundancy, external and internal, 178, 197
Redundant supports, 125, 149
Repose, angle of, 342
Resolution, force, 26, 27, 66, 67
force and couple, 51, 58, 77

506

Index

Resultant, of concurrent forces, 25, 28, 59, 89
of coplanar forces, 28, 58
couple, 58, 88, 89
of ﬂuid pressure, 307, 309, 311
force, 58, 88, 89, 235, 325
of forces on beam cross section, 279
of general force system, 89
of parallel forces, 26, 59, 89
Right-hand rule, 38, 67, 74, 483
Rigid bodies, interconnected, 204, 402
Rigid body, 4
equilibrium of, 401
Rolling resistance, coefﬁcient of, 378
Scalar, 4
Scalar components, 27
Scalar or dot product, 67, 398, 483
Screw, friction in, 358
Second moment of area, 238, 441
Sections, method of, 188, 198, 224
Series, selected expansions, 485
Shear force, 279, 306
Shear-force diagram, 280
Shear-moment relation for beams, 280, 281, 282
Shear stress, 442
Singularity functions, 282
SI units, 9
Sliding vector, 5, 24, 38, 76
Slug, 9
Space, 4
Space trusses, 197, 224
Speciﬁc weight, 234
Spring, linear and nonlinear, 112, 113
potential energy of, 417
stiffness of, 417
Stability, of equilibrium, 125, 421
of ﬂoating bodies, 312
for single degree-of-freedom system, 421
of trusses, 178, 197
Statically determinate structures, 125, 148, 173, 178, 197
Statically indeterminate structures, 125, 149, 178, 197, 204
Static friction, 338
coefﬁcient of, 338, 495
Statics, 4
Stevinus, 3
Stiffness of spring, 417
Stress, 234
shear, 442
Structures, statical determinacy of, 125, 148, 173, 178, 197, 204
types of, 173
Submerged surfaces, pressure on, 307, 309, 310
Subtraction of vectors, 6, 482
Symmetry, considerations of, 237, 464
System, with elastic members, 417
force–couple, 51, 58, 77
of forces, concurrent, 25, 59, 75, 89, 121, 146
coplanar, 58
general, 23, 88
parallel, 59, 89, 121, 148
ideal, 402
of interconnected bodies, 204, 402
mechanical, 110
real, 404
of units, 8
Table, of area moments of inertia, 497
of centroids, 497
of coefﬁcients of friction, 495
of densities, 495

of derivatives, 485
of mathematical relations, 479
of solar system constants, 496
Tension in truss members, 175, 176
Theorem, of Pappus, 264
of Varignon, 39, 59, 75
Three-force member, 122
Thrust bearing, friction in, 369
Time, 4, 10
Ton, 10
Torque, see Moment, of force
Torsional moment, 279, 442
Transfer of axes, for moments of inertia, 444
for products of inertia, 464
Transmissibility, principle of, 5, 24, 58
Triangle law, 6, 25
Triple scalar product, 75, 484
Triple vector product, 484
Trusses, deﬁnition, 175
plane, 175
simple, 175, 197
space, 197, 224
stability of, 178, 197
statical determinacy of, 178, 197, 224
types of, 174
Two-force members, 122, 175
U.S. customary units, 9
Units, 8, 38, 400
Unit vectors, 7, 27, 66, 68, 75
Unstable equilibrium, 421
Varignon, 3
Varignon’s theorem, 39, 59, 75
Vector equation, 8
Vectors, 4, 23
addition of, 6, 25, 28, 482
components of, 6, 26, 27, 28, 66
couple, 50, 76
cross or vector product of, 39, 74, 483
derivative of, 484
dot or scalar product of, 67, 398, 483
ﬁxed, 5, 24
free, 5, 6, 50, 76
moment, 39, 74
notation for, 5
resolution of, 26, 27, 66, 67
sliding, 5, 24, 38, 76
subtraction of, 6, 482
unit, 7, 27, 66, 68, 75
Vector sum, of couples, 76, 88
of forces, 25, 28, 58, 88
Virtual displacement, 400
Virtual work, 397, 400
for elastic systems, 420
for ideal systems, 402, 403
for a particle, 401
for a rigid body, 401
Viscosity, 336
Wear in bearings, 369
Wedges, friction in, 357
Weight, 12, 25, 113, 234
Work, of a couple, 399
of a force, 398
units of, 400
virtual, 397, 400
Wrench, 89

Problem Answers

(When a problem asks for both a general and a speciﬁc result, only the speciﬁc result might be listed below.)

Chapter 1
1/1
1/2
1/3
1/4
1/5
1/6
1/7
1/8

␪x ϭ 36.9Њ, ␪y ϭ 126.9Њ, n ϭ 0.8i Ϫ 0.6j
V ϭ 16.51 units, ␪x ϭ 83.0Њ
VЈ ϭ 14.67 units, ␪x ϭ 162.6Њ
␪x ϭ 56.1Њ, ␪y ϭ 138.0Њ, ␪z ϭ 68.2Њ
m ϭ 93.2 slugs, m ϭ 1361 kg
W ϭ 819 N, W ϭ 184.1 lb
W ϭ 578 N, m ϭ 4.04 slugs, m ϭ 58.9 kg
A ϩ B ϭ 8.40, A Ϫ B ϭ 4.94
AB ϭ 11.51, A/B ϭ 3.86

1/9
1/10
1/11

F ϭ 1.984(1020) N, F ϭ 4.46(1019) lb
F ϭ 1.358(10Ϫ9) N
␪ ϭ 5Њ: ns ϭ 0.1270%, nt ϭ Ϫ0.254%
␪ ϭ 10Њ: ns ϭ 0.510%, nt ϭ Ϫ1.017%
␪ ϭ 20Њ: ns ϭ 2.06%, nt ϭ Ϫ4.09%

2/8
2/9
2/10

2/12

Fn ϭ Ϫ62.9 N, F ϭ 97.9 N
␪ ϭ 49.9Њ, R ϭ 1077 lb
(a) Fn ϭ 34.2 N, Ft ϭ 94.0 N
(b) Fn ϭ Ϫ17.36 N, Ft ϭ 98.5 N
R ϭ 2.35i Ϫ 3.45j kips
FΊr2 Ϫ s2
Fs
Ft ϭ r , Fn ϭ Ϫ
r

2/13
2/14
2/15

T ϭ 5.83 kN, R ϭ 9.25 kN
R ϭ 600i ϩ 346j N, R ϭ 693 N
Ft ϭ 1.286 kN, Fn ϭ 1.532 kN

Chapter 2
2/1
2/2

2/3
2/4
2/5
2/6
2/7

Fx ϭ 460 N, Fy ϭ Ϫ386 N, F ϭ 460i Ϫ 386j N
F ϭ Ϫ346i ϩ 200j lb
Fx ϭ Ϫ346 lb, Fy ϭ 200 lb
Fx ϭ Ϫ346i lb, Fy ϭ 200j lb
F ϭ Ϫ6i Ϫ 2.5j kN
Fx ϭ 2650 lb, Fy ϭ 1412 lb
F ϭ Ϫ1080i Ϫ 1440j N
Fx ϭ ϪF sin ␤, Fy ϭ ϪF cos ␤
Fn ϭ F sin (␣ϩ␤), Ft ϭ F cos (␣ϩ␤)
R ϭ 3.80 kN, ␪ ϭ 338Њ (or Ϫ21.6Њ)

2/11

507

508

Problem Answers

2/16

Tx ϭ
Ty ϭ

2/17
2/18
2/19
2/20
2/21
2/22
2/23
2/24
2/25
2/26
2/27
2/28
᭤ 2/29
᭤ 2/30

2/31
2/32
2/33
2/34
2/35
2/36
2/37
2/38
2/39
2/40
2/41
2/42
2/43
2/44

T(1 ϩ cos ␪)
Ί3 ϩ 2 cos ␪ Ϫ 2 sin ␪
T(sin ␪ Ϫ 1)

Ί3 ϩ 2 cos ␪ Ϫ 2 sin ␪
Tn ϭ 66.7 N, Tt ϭ 74.5 N
R ϭ 50.2 lb, ␪ ϭ 84.3Њ
R ϭ 88.8i ϩ 245j N
Ra ϭ 1170 N, Rb ϭ 622 N, Pa ϭ 693 N
Fa ϭ 1093 lb, Fb ϭ 980 lb
Pa ϭ 400 lb, Pb ϭ 207 lb
Fa ϭ 1.935 kN, Fb ϭ 2.39 kN
Pa ϭ 3.63 kN, Pb ϭ 3.76 kN
(a) R ϭ 872 N, ␪ ϭ 36.6Њ
(b) R ϭ 520i Ϫ 700j N
P ϭ 537 lb, T ϭ 800 lb
␪ ϭ 51.3Њ, ␤ ϭ 18.19Њ
Tn ϭ 333 N, Tt ϭ Ϫ672 N
␪ ϭ 51.3Њ, ␤ ϭ 18.19Њ
BC: Pt ϭ Ϫ77.9 N, Pn ϭ 45.0 N
AB: Pt ϭ 63.6 N, Pn ϭ 63.6 N
Fx ϭ Ϫ101.2 N, Fy ϭ 194.4 N
Fn ϭ 50.4 N, Ft ϭ Ϫ39.2 N
MO ϭ 2.68 kN ⅐ m CCW, MO ϭ 2.68k kN ⅐ m
(x, y) ϭ (Ϫ1.3, 0) and (0, 0.78)m
MB ϭ 83.2 lb- ft CW
T ϭ 36 N
Fbh
CW
MO ϭ
Ίb2 ϩ h2
MO ϭ 46.4 N ⅐ m CW
MO ϭ 43.4 N ⅐ m CW
MO ϭ 70.0 lb-ft CW
MO ϭ 5.64 N ⅐ m CW

΂

΃

2
MO ϭ mgb 1 Ϫ ␲ CW
MB ϭ 48 N ⅐ m CW
MAϭ 81.9 N ⅐ m CW
MO ϭ 0.268 lb-in. CCW
MO ϭ 191.0 N ⅐ m CCW
MO ϭ 102.8 lb-ft CCW
MO ϭ Tr sin (␣ ϩ ␪) CW
MP ϭ Tr[cos ␣ ϩ sin (␣ ϩ ␪)] CW

΂h΃
b

2/45

␪ ϭ tanϪ1

2/46
2/47
2/48
2/49
2/50
2/51
2/52

MO ϭ 130 lb-in. CCW
MO ϭ 0.1335 ϩ 0.0282s N ⅐ mm
MO ϭ 0.866 N ⅐ m CCW
MO ϭ 128.6 lb-in. CW, T ϭ 64.3 lb
MO ϭ 23.5 N ⅐ m CCW
MO ϭ 5010 lb-ft CCW
␪ ϭ 65.8Њ, MO ϭ 740 lb-in. CW

2/53
2/54
2/55
2/56
2/57
2/58
2/59
2/60
2/61
2/62
2/63
2/64
2/65
2/66
2/67
2/68
2/69
2/70
2/71
2/72
2/73
2/74
2/75
2/76

2/77
2/78
2/79
2/80
2/81

2/82

2/83
2/84
2/85
2/86
2/87
2/88
2/89
2/90

␪ ϭ 57.5Њ
MO ϭ 80.2k lb-ft
MO ϭ 26.8 N ⅐ m CCW
FDE ϭ 141.6 lb, R ϭ 220 lb at 94.6Њ
MO ϭ 0.902 kN ⅐ m CW
MO ϭ 41.5 N ⅐ m CW
␣ ϭ 33.2Њ, (MO)max ϭ 41.6 N ⅐ m CW
M ϭ 1440 lb-in. CW
F ϭ 12 kN at 30Њ, MO ϭ 24 kN ⅐ m CW
MB ϭ 76.0 kN ⅐ m CW
yA ϭ Ϫ0.4 m
F ϭ 16.18 N
M ϭ F(b cos ␪ ϩ h sin ␪) CCW
F ϭ 875 lb
R ϭ 7 lb at 60Њ, MO ϭ 14.85 lb-in. CCW
R ϭ 10 kN down, MO ϭ 0.75 kN ⅐ m CCW
P ϭ 51.4 kN
MAΊb2 ϩ h2
(below A)
dϭ
Rb
F ϭ 700 lb
F ϭ 231 N
M ϭ 2.60 N ⅐ m CW
R ϭ 50 N at 110Њ, MO ϭ 17.29 N ⅐ m CCW
F ϭ 43.4i ϩ 246j N, MO ϭ 60.0 N ⅐ m CW
R ϭ 250 N at Ϫ45Њ, MC ϭ 174.9 N ⅐ m CW
M ϭ 21.7 N ⅐ m CCW
b
i ϩ hj
2
3hbF
, MB ϭ
CW
FϭF
b2
b2
2
2
ϩh
ϩh
4
4
4
y ϭ Ϫ40.3 mm
F at 67.5Њ, MO ϭ 0.462FR CCW
␪ ϭ 56.9Њ, F ϭ 1361 lb
R ϭ 17.43 kN at ␪x ϭ 26.1Њ
(a) R ϭ Ϫ2Fj, MO ϭ 0
(b) R ϭ 0, MO ϭ Fdk
(c) R ϭ ϪFi ϩ Fj, MO ϭ 0
d
(a) R ϭ 2Fi along y ϭ Ϫ
2
3d
(b) R ϭ Ϫ2Fi along y ϭ
4
d
(c) R ϭ ϪFi ϩΊ3Fj along y ϭ ϪΊ3 x ϩ
2
d ϭ 10.70 m left of A
R ϭ 3 kN down, x ϭ 4.33 m
R ϭ 80 N left, y ϭ 40 mm
y ϭ Ϫ10 in.
R ϭ 1.644i ϩ 1.159j kN, MA ϭ 2.22 kN ⅐ m CCW
M ϭ 148.0 N ⅐ m CCW
R ϭ 400i Ϫ 3010j lb
MA ϭ 18,190 lb-ft CW, x ϭ 6.05 ft
d ϭ 4 m below O

΄Ί ΅

Ί

Problem Answers

2/91
2/92
2/93
2/94
2/95
2/96

2/97
2/98
2/99
2/100
2/101
2/102
2/103
2/104
2/105
2/106
2/107
2/108
2/109

R ϭ T(1.966i ϩ 0.259j), MO ϭ 2.69T CW
x ϭ Ϫ10.39 m
x ϭ 1.637 m, y ϭ Ϫ0.997 m
R ϭ Ϫ15i Ϫ 47.3j kN, x ϭ 7.42 m
y ϭ Ϫ23.4 m
R ϭ 346i Ϫ 2200j N
MA ϭ 11 000 N ⅐ m CW, x ϭ 5 m
x ϭ 7.83 mm, y ϭ 14.55 mm
R ϭ 45i Ϫ 15j lb, MA ϭ Ϫ1650k lb- in.
110
1
yϭϪ xϩ
(in.)
3
3
R ϭ 903i ϩ 175j N, x ϭ 1.308 m
y ϭ Ϫ0.253 m
R ϭ 185i ϩ 1133j lb
MG ϭ 460 lb- ft CCW, x ϭ 4.06 ft
FC ϭ FD ϭ 6.42 N, FB ϭ 98.9 N
R ϭ 12.10i Ϫ 18.71j lb, MO ϭ Ϫ358k lb-in.
y ϭ Ϫ1.547x ϩ 29.6 ( in.)
F ϭ 791i ϩ 403j ϩ 146.5k lb, Fy ϭ 403 lb
F ϭ 2.05i ϩ 3.55j ϩ 2.87k kN
Fx ϭ 2.05 kN, FOA ϭ 3.55 kN
T ϭ 2(Ϫ0.920i ϩ 0.383j ϩ 0.0767k) kN
␪x ϭ 155.7Њ, ␪xz ϭ 13.17Њ
T ϭ 0.876i ϩ 0.438j Ϫ 2.19k kN
TAC ϭ 2.06 kN
F ϭ 92.7i Ϫ 61.8j Ϫ 61.8k N
T ϭ 0.321i ϩ 0.641j Ϫ 0.962k kN
TGF ϭ 0.978 kN
F ϭ 500[0.781i Ϫ 0.488j ϩ 0.390k] lb
Fx ϭ 390 lb, Fy ϭ Ϫ244 lb, Fz ϭ 195.2 lb

Ί6 kN, ␪ ϭ 56.8Њ
5

2/110 FCD ϭ

2/111 T ϭ Ϫ598i ϩ 411j ϩ 189.5k N
2/112 T ϭ 110.7i Ϫ 775j ϩ 166.0k lb
␪x ϭ 82.0Њ, ␪y ϭ 165.6Њ, ␪z ϭ 78.0Њ
2/113 ␪ ϭ 54.9Њ
2/114 TBC ϭ 251 N
2/115 T ϭ 778 lb, ␪xy ϭ 8.88Њ
2/116 TCD ϭ 46.0 N
2/117 T ϭ 500(0.370i ϩ 0.410j Ϫ 0.833k) N
TDC ϭ 458 N
F
᭤ 2/118 F ϭ
[(2 sin ␾ Ϫ 1)(cos ␪i ϩ sin ␪j)
Ί5 – 4 sin ␾
ϩ 2 cos ␾k]
᭤ 2/119 T ϭ 191.0i ϩ 28.7j Ϫ 51.8k lb, Txz ϭ 197.9 lb
2acF
᭤ 2/120 Fx ϭ
Ίa2 ϩ b2Ί a2 ϩ b2 ϩ 4c2
2bcF
Fy ϭ
2 ϩ b2Ί a2 ϩ b2 ϩ 4c2
Ίa

Fz ϭ F

a
b
Ί a ϩ bϩ ϩ 4c
2

2

509

2

2

2

2/121 M1 ϭ ϪcF1j, M2 ϭ F2(cj Ϫ bk), M3 ϭ ϪbF3k
2/122 MO ϭ Ϫ320i ϩ 160j lb-ft, MO ϭ 358 lb- ft
2/123 MO ϭ F(Ϫci ϩ ak), MA ϭ Fak
Fac
MOB ϭ Ϫ 2
(ai ϩ bj)
a ϩ b2
2/124 M ϭ (Ϫ0.450i ϩ 0.300j)106 lb-in.
2/125 M ϭ (126i Ϫ 36j ϩ 50.6k)103 lb-in.
2/126 MO ϭ 2.81 kN ⅐ m
2/127 M ϭ Ϫ75i ϩ 22.5j N ⅐ m
␳g
2/128 MO ϭ (a2j Ϫ b2i)
2
2/129 Mz ϭ 208k lb-in.
2/130 MO ϭ Ϫ90.6i Ϫ 690j Ϫ 338k lb-in.
MOA ϭ Ϫ690 lb-in.
a
2/131 MO ϭ ␳ag(b ϩ )[Ϫsin ␪i ϩ cos ␪j]
2
2/132 MO ϭ 480i ϩ 2400k N ⅐ m
2/133 MO ϭ Ϫ98.7i ϩ 17.25j ϩ 29.9k N ⅐ m
Mx ϭ Ϫ98.7 N ⅐ m
2/134 R ϭ Ϫ598i ϩ 411j ϩ 189.5k N
MO ϭ Ϫ361i Ϫ 718j ϩ 419k N ⅐ m
2/135 M ϭ Ϫ60i ϩ 48k lb-in.
2/136 M ϭ 3400i Ϫ 51 000j Ϫ 51 000k N ⅐ m
2/137 MO ϭ Ϫ48.6 j Ϫ 9.49k N ⅐ m, d ϭ 74.5 mm
2/138 R ϭ Ϫ38.3i Ϫ 32.1j N
MO ϭ 643i Ϫ 766j ϩ 6250k N ⅐ mm
2/139 F ϭ 228 N
2/140 F ϭ Ϫ1.716j ϩ 28.3k kN
M ϭ 5.15i Ϫ 90k kN ⅐ m
2/141 Mx ϭ 31.1 N ⅐ m
(Mx)W ϭ Ϫ31.1 N ⅐ m, MOB ϭ 0
2/142 MO ϭ Ϫ2.89i Ϫ 0.962k kN ⅐ m
Mz ϭ Ϫ0.962k kN ⅐ m
2/143 MA ϭ Ϫ5.40i ϩ 4.68j lb-in.
MAB ϭ Ϫ4.05i Ϫ 2.34k lb-in.
2/144 MO ϭ Ϫ260i ϩ 328j ϩ 88k N ⅐ m
2/145 MB ϭ Ϫ1871i ϩ 1080j Ϫ 3780k lb-in.
MC ϭ Ϫ2840k lb-in., MBC ϭ 2540 lb-in.
2/146 Mz ϭ 75.0 N ⅐ m
MO ϭ Ϫ9.04i Ϫ 414j ϩ 75.0k N ⅐ m
F
2/147 F ϭ
(cos ␪i ϩ sin ␪j Ϫ 2k)
Ί5
Fh
(cos ␪j Ϫ sin ␪i)
Ί5
᭤2/148 MO ϭ 136.4i Ϫ 679k lb-in.
MЈ ϭ 685 lb-in.
2/149 L ϭ 1 oz, ␪ ϭ 30Њ, R ϭ 5.82 oz
MO ϭ

510

Problem Answers

2/150 R ϭ 600 N down
2/177 R ϭ 4.75 kN, MA ϭ 21.1 kN ⅐ m CCW
2/178 M ϭ 864i Ϫ 6720k lb-in., M ϭ 6770 lb-in.
MO ϭ Ϫ216i ϩ 216j N ⅐ m, R ⊥ MO
2/179 (a) TAB ϭ Ϫ2.05i Ϫ 1.432j Ϫ 1.663k kN
2/151 R ϭ Fk, MO ϭ Fb(4i ϩ j)
x ϭ Ϫb, y ϭ 4b
(b) MO ϭ 7.63i Ϫ 10.90j kN ⅐ m
2/152 x ϭ 2.92 m, y ϭ 6.33 m
(MO)x ϭ 7.63 kN ⅐ m, (MO)y ϭ Ϫ10.90 kN ⅐ m
2/153 R ϭ F(0.5j Ϫ 0.1340k)
(MO)z ϭ 0
MO ϭ Fb(1.866i ϩ 0.268j ϩ k), yes
(c) TAO ϭ 2.69 kN
2/154 R ϭ 1000j ϩ 500k N
hi ϩ r(cos ␪ Ϫ 1)j ϩ r sin ␪k
2/180 F ϭ F
MO ϭ 12i Ϫ 300j ϩ 1200k N ⅐ m
Ίh2 ϩ 2r2(1 Ϫ cos ␪)
2/155 R ϭ Ϫ1.2j lb, MG ϭ Ϫ30i ϩ 72k lb-in.
2/181 T ϭ 282i ϩ 112.7j Ϫ 398k N, Mz ϭ Ϫ45.0 N ⅐ m
2/156 R ϭ Ϫ8i kN, MG ϭ 48j ϩ 820k kN ⅐ m
2/182 M ϭ Ϫ20i Ϫ 6.77j Ϫ 37.2k N ⅐ m
2/157 R ϭ Ϫ266j ϩ 1085k N
2/183 R ϭ 1093 lb, M ϭ 9730 lb-ft
MO ϭ Ϫ48.9j Ϫ 114.5k N ⅐ m, no
*2/184 ␪ ϭ 21.7Њ, T ϭ 1.022 kN
2/158 R ϭ Ϫ20i Ϫ 37.9j ϩ 12.65k kN
␲
␲
␲
M ϭ 45.3j ϩ 40.9k kN ⅐ m
d2 ϩ 80d cos ␪ ϩ
Ϫ 3200 sin ␪ ϩ
ϩ 3200
12.5 ␪ ϩ
4
4
4
2/159 y ϭ Ϫ4 m, z ϭ 2.33 m
*2/185 T ϭ
2/160 R ϭ 600j lb, MO ϭ 1200i ϩ 4800k lb-ft
␲
␲
d sin ␪ ϩ
ϩ 40 cos ␪ ϩ
4
4
x ϭ 8 ft, z ϭ Ϫ2 ft
2/161 R ϭ 4i ϩ 3j Ϫ 6k kN, R ϭ 7.81 kN
2/186 (MO)max ϭ 0.5FR at ␪ ϭ 60Њ
*
M ϭ Ϫ0.4i Ϫ 4j ϩ 4k kN ⅐ m, M ϭ 5.67 kN ⅐ m
90 cos ␪[Ί0.34 ϩ 0.3 sin ␪Ϫ0.65]
2/162 R ϭ 25i Ϫ 60j Ϫ 43.3k lb
*2/187 M ϭ
Ί0.34 ϩ 0.3 sin ␪
MO ϭ 1153i Ϫ 830j ϩ 250k lb- in.
2/163 R ϭ Ϫ20j Ϫ 40k lb, MO ϭ Ϫ56i Ϫ 320j lb-in.
*2/188 MB ϭ 104 sin(␪ ϩ 50Њ) (lb-in.)
x ϭ Ϫ6.4 in., y ϭ 1.4 in.
MA ϭ 154.8 sin ␪ ϩ 79.7 cos ␪ (lb-in.)
Ϫ76.8 cos ␪i ϩ 38.4 cos ␪j Ϫ 38.4 sin ␪k
aT
7a
2/164 y ϭ 0, z ϭ , M ϭ Ϫ (i ϩ j)
*2/189 MO ϭ
2
2
Ί1.44 – 1.28 sin ␪
3aF
2/165 R ϭ F(i Ϫ 3k), M ϭ
3000(sin ␪ ϩ cos ␪)
(i Ϫ 3k)
10
k lb-ft
*2/190 MO ϭ
Ί11 ϩ 6(sin ␪ Ϫ cos ␪)
a
y ϭ , z ϭ 2a
10
(MO)max ϭ 1414 lb-ft at ␪ ϭ 16.87Њ
2/166 x ϭ 66.9 mm, z ϭ 0, M ϭ Ϫ99.6 N ⅐ m
Ϫ200xA
Fb
b
*2/191 Fx ϭ [Ίx2 ϩ 0.0325 Ϫ 0.15]
᭤ 2/167 x ϭ a ϩ c, y ϭ , M ϭ
(iϪk)
2
Ίx ϩ 0.0325
2
2
᭤ 2/168 R ϭ 44.7 kN, M ϭ Ϫ26.9 kN ⅐ m
20
Fy ϭ [Ίx2 ϩ 0.0325 Ϫ 0.15]
x ϭ 0.221 m, y ϭ Ϫ0.950 m
2 ϩ 0.0325
Ίx
2/169 TB ϭ ϪTA ϭ Ϫ1.664i ϩ 1.109 kN
30
2/170 F ϭ 20.7 lb, Fx ϭ Ϫ5.36 lb
Fz ϭ [Ίx2 ϩ 0.0325 Ϫ 0.15]
Ίx2 ϩ 0.0325
2/171 M1 ϭ ϪcF1i, M2 ϭ F2(ci Ϫ ak), M3 ϭ ϪaF3k
Ί1.5 – 0.5 sin ␪ Ϫ 1
2/172 F ϭ 300 lb
*2/192 MO ϭ
[Ϫ518i ϩ
2/173 x ϭ 266 mm
Ί1.5 – 0.5 sin ␪
2/174 MO ϭ 189.6 N ⅐ m CCW
259 cos ␪k] lb-ft
2/175 d ϭ 0.733 m
(Mx)max ϭ 95.1 lb-ft at ␪ ϭ 0 and ␪ ϭ ␲
2/176 R ϭ 80 lb down, MA ϭ 1240 lb- in. CW
(Mz)max ϭ 47.6 lb-ft at ␪ ϭ 0 and ␪ ϭ ␲
x ϭ 15.5 in.

΄

΂

΅

΃Ί

΂

΂

΃

΂

΃

΂

΄
΄
΄

΃

΃

΅
΅
΅

Chapter 3
3/1
3/2
3/3
3/4
3/5

FA ϭ 566 N, FB ϭ 283 N
NA ϭ 12 lb down, NB ϭ 24 lb up
NA ϭ 15.91 lb, NB ϭ 13.09 lb
Ay ϭ 1864 N, By ϭ 2840 N
Ox ϭ 1500 N, Oy ϭ 6100 N
MO ϭ 7560 N ⅐ m CCW

3/6
3/7
3/8
3/9
3/10
3/11

Ox ϭ 0, Oy ϭ 1736 N, MO ϭ 7460 N ⅐ m CW
W ϭ 162 lb
T ϭ 131.2 lb
(a) P ϭ 5.59 N, (b) P ϭ 5.83 N
(a) P ϭ 6.00 N, (b) P ϭ 6.25 N
m ϭ 1509 kg, x ϭ 1052 mm

Problem Answers

3/12
3/13
3/14
3/15
3/16
3/17
3/18
3/19
3/20
3/21
3/22
3/23
3/24
3/25
3/26
3/27
3/28
3/29
3/30
3/31
3/32
3/33
3/34
3/35
3/36
3/37
3/38
3/39
3/40
3/41
3/42
3/43
3/44
3/45
3/46
3/47
3/48
3/49
3/50
3/51
3/52
3/53
3/54
3/55
3/56
3/57
3/58
3/59

P ϭ 225 N
TAC ϭ 215 N, TBC ϭ 264 N
T ϭ 81.2 lb
␪ ϭ 18.43Њ
T ϭ 160 N
T ϭ 90 N, O ϭ 94.9 N
NA ϭ 0.1091mg, O ϭ 1.006mg
m1 ϭ 0.436m
F ϭ 52.8 N
P ϭ 40 lb
O ϭ 64.6 lb
NA ϭ NB ϭ 12.42 kN
T ϭ 38.3 lb, CD ϭ 5.23 ft
(a) FC ϭ 1705 N, (b) FC ϭ 1464 N
P ϭ 111.1 N
Dx ϭ L, Dy ϭ 1.033L, Ay ϭ 1.967L
F ϭ 13.98 N, O ϭ 48.8 N
WL ϭ 550 lb
T ϭ 200 lb, A ϭ 188.8 lb
Ax ϭ 869 N, Ay ϭ 2350 N, MA ϭ 8810 N ⅐ m CW
NC ϭ 0.433mg, O ϭ 0.869mg
NA ϭ 0.892mg, O ϭ 0.580mg
P ϭ 166.7 N, T2 ϭ 1.917 kN
B ϭ 133.3 N, C ϭ 253 N
NC ϭ 18 lb
R ϭ 4.38 kN
A ϭ 1.082 kN
F ϭ 1832 N
FD ϭ 710 N, Ox ϭ 662 N, Oy ϭ Ϫ185.6 N
F ϭ 753 N, E ϭ 644 N
F ϭ 2.25W, O ϭ 2.67W
P ϭ 45.5 N, R ϭ 691 N
C ϭ 1276 lb, P ϭ 209 lb /in.2
M ϭ 41.5 lb-ft, F ϭ 35.3 lb
(a) nA ϭ Ϫ4.14%, nB ϭ 4.98%
(b) nA ϭ 3.15%, nB ϭ Ϫ5.97%
nA ϭ Ϫ32.6%, nB ϭ 2.28%
O ϭ 4140 N, P ϭ 2.58(106) Pa
RB ϭ 1382 N, O ϭ 2270 N
M ϭ 4.94 kN ⅐ m CCW
F ϭ 121.7 lb
P ϭ 26.3 N
T ϭ 0.1176kL ϩ 0.366mg
O ϭ 820 lb
mg
2
Cϭ
(Ί3 ϩ ␲), FA ϭ 1.550mg
2
Ax ϭ 346 N, Ay ϭ 1100 N, Fy ϭ 1100 N
F ϭ 187.1 lb
A ϭ 1266 N, B ϭ 1514 N
M ϭ 49.9 sin ␪ (N ⅐ mm) CW

᭤ 3/60

3/61
3/62
3/63
3/64
3/65
3/66
3/67
3/68
3/69
3/70
3/71
3/72

511

(a) S ϭ 0.669W, C ϭ 0.770W
(b) S ϭ 2.20W, C ϭ 2.53W
R ϭ Ϫ173.9i Ϫ 46.6k N
M ϭ Ϫ9.32i Ϫ 21.7j ϩ 34.8k N ⅐ m
TAB ϭ TAC ϭ 47.8 lb, TAD ϭ 31.2 lb
TA ϭ TB ϭ 20.4 lb, TC ϭ 27.2 lb
TAB ϭ TAC ϭ 1698 N, D ϭ 1884 N
TA ϭ TB ϭ 278 N, TC ϭ 262 N
Ox ϭ 1.953 lb, Oy ϭ Ϫ16.27 lb, Oz ϭ 16.27 lb
Mx ϭ 81.4 lb-ft, My ϭ 9.76 lb-ft
T1 ϭ 4.90 kN
O ϭ 300 lb, M ϭ 8280 lb-ft
␳g a4 b4
ϩ
2
4
9
m ϭ 1509 kg, x ϭ 1052 mm, y ϭ Ϫ20.5 mm
C: NA ϭ 2350 N, NB ϭ 5490 N, NC ϭ 7850 N
D: NA ϭ 3140 N, NB ϭ 4710 N, ND ϭ 7850 N

Ί

O ϭ ␳g(a ϩ b ϩ c), M ϭ

Ox ϭ 0, Oy ϭ 0, Oz ϭ ␳g(a ϩ b ϩ c)
b
΂a ϩ b ϩ c΃, M ϭ Ϫ␳gb΂2 ϩ c΃
2

Mx ϭ ␳ga

y

3/74
3/75

Mz ϭ 0
Ox ϭ 1962 N, Oy ϭ 0, Oz ϭ 6540 N
TAC ϭ 4810 N, TBD ϭ 2770 N, TBE ϭ 654 N
Ax ϭ 48 lb, Bx ϭ 12 lb
␪ ϭ 9.49Њ, X ϭ 118.0 mm

3/76

Ox ϭ 0, Oy ϭ ␳gh(a ϩ b ϩ c), Oz ϭ 0

3/73

b
΂2 ϩ c΃, M ϭ 0

Mx ϭ ␳ghb

␳gh
(ab ϩ ac ϩ c2)
2
A ϭ 275 lb, B ϭ 158.5 lb, C ϭ 317 lb
⌬NA ϭ 66.1 N, ⌬NB ϭ 393 N, ⌬NC ϭ 522 N
TA ϭ TB ϭ 5.41 kN, TC ϭ 9.87 kN
T ϭ 452 lb, T0 ϭ 267 lb
␪ ϭ 30Њ
Ox ϭ 869 N, Oy ϭ 0, Oz ϭ 2440 N
Mx ϭ Ϫ524 N ⅐ m, My ϭ 8700 N ⅐ m
Mz ϭ 341 N ⅐ m
FS ϭ 3950 N, FA ϭ 437 N, FB ϭ 2450 N
R ϭ mg /Ί7
P ϭ 2.72 lb, FA ϭ 1.896 lb, FB ϭ 0.785 lb
NA ϭ 15.58 lb, NB ϭ 12.95 lb
k ϭ 16.41 lb /in.
⌬NA ϭ 1000 N, ⌬NB ϭ ⌬NC ϭ Ϫ500 N
B ϭ 2.36 kN
C ϭ 100 lb, Bxy ϭ 45.5 lb, Axy ϭ 38.0 lb
Pmin ϭ 18 N, B ϭ 30.8 N, C ϭ 29.7 N
If P = Pmin/2: D = 13.5 N
A ϭ 31.4 lb, B ϭ 72.1 lb
P ϭ 0.206 N, Ay ϭ 0.275 N, By ϭ Ϫ0.0760 N
Mz ϭ

3/77
3/78
3/79
3/80
3/81
3/82

3/83
3/84
3/85
3/86
3/87
3/88
3/89
3/90
3/91
3/92

y

512

Problem Answers

3/93

FB ϭ 70 lb, Dn ϭ 101.1 lb
M ϭ 47.7 N ⅐ m, V ϭ 274 N, P ϭ 321 N
Mx ϭ Ϫ1.857 N ⅐ m, My ϭ 1.411 N ⅐ m
Mz ϭ Ϫ2.56 N ⅐ m, Bz ϭ 14.72 N
T ϭ 277 N, B ϭ 169.9 N
P ϭ 50 N, NC ϭ 58.1 N, NA ϭ 108.6 N
NB ϭ 32.4 N
T ϭ 471 N, O ϭ 144.9 N
L = 1.676 kN
R ϭ 566 N
A ϭ 15 lb, B ϭ 40 lb, T ϭ 60.2 lb
P ϭ 351 N
NA ϭ 159.9 lb down, NB ϭ 129.9 lb up

᭤ 3/94
᭤ 3/95
᭤ 3/96
᭤ 3/97
᭤ 3/98

3/99
3/100
3/101
3/102
3/103

΂

m m1
3/104 NA ϭ Ί3g
Ϫ
2
3

΃

3
m
2
FA ϭ 486 N down, FB ϭ 686 N up
T1 ϭ 45.8 kN, T2 ϭ 26.7 kN, A ϭ 44.2 kN
AЈ ϭ 41.7 lb
D ϭ 7.60 kN
⌬F ϭ 521 N, ⌬T ϭ 344 N
xϭ 199.2 mm
TA ϭ 147.2 N, TB ϭ 245 N, TC ϭ 196.2 N
T ϭ 1053 N
FA ϭ 24.5 lb
mg
Pϭ
3Ί2

3/115 A ϭ 183.9 N, B ϭ 424 N

᭤ 3/116 Ox ϭ Ϫ14 900 N, Oy ϭ 24 400 N, Oz ϭ 8890 N

Mx ϭ Ϫ19 390 N ⅐ m, My ϭ Ϫ12 120 N ⅐ m
Mz ϭ 857 N ⅐ m
Ί3
Ί2
cos ␪Ϫ
cos (␪ ϩ 15Њ)
2
4
*3/117 T ϭ mg
cos ␪
*3/118 T ϭ

1

[8 ϩ 8 cos (␪ ϩ 60Њ)]2

*3/119

(a) m1 ϭ 0.634m, (b) m1 ϭ

3/105
3/106
3/107
3/108
3/109
3/110
3/111
3/112
3/113
3/114

ϩ
΄2750 cos4␪sin (687 cos ()␪ ϩ 60Њ)΅ ϫ
␪ ϩ 60Њ

*3/120
*3/121
*3/122
*3/123
*3/124
*3/125
*3/126

␪max ϭ 79.1Њ
1
1
(a) R ϭ [400x2 Ϫ 400x ϩ 1072]2
3
1
(b) Rmin ϭ 10.39 kN at x ϭ m
2
(c) Rmax ϭ 24.3 kN at x ϭ 3.8 m
(TAC)max ϭ 600 N at x ϭ 3.91 m
(TBC)max ϭ 600 N at x ϭ 6.09 m
␣ ϭ 14.44Њ, ␤ ϭ 3.57Њ, ␥ ϭ 18.16Њ
TAB ϭ 529 lb, TBC ϭ 513 lb, TCD ϭ 539 lb
AB ϭ 17.01 ft, CD ϭ 8.99 ft
TAB ϭ 503 lb, TBC ϭ 493 lb, TCD ϭ 532 lb
T45Њ ϭ 5.23 N, T90Њ ϭ 8.22 N
T ϭ 0 at ␪ ϭ 1.729Њ
51.1 cos ␪ Ϫ 38.3 sin ␪
Tϭ
Ί425 – 384 sin ␪
cos ␪
T ϭ 495 N at ␪ ϭ 15Њ

Chapter 4
4/1
4/2
4/3
4/4
4/5
4/6

4/7

4/8

AB ϭ 2350 N T, AC ϭ 981 N T
BC ϭ 2550 N C
AB ϭ 3400 N T, AC ϭ 981 N T
BC ϭ 1962 N C
AB ϭ 1.115W T, AC ϭ 0.577W T
BC ϭ 0.816W C
AB ϭ 5 kN T, AC ϭ 5Ί5 kN T
BC ϭ 5Ί2 kN C AD ϭ 0, CD ϭ 15 kN C
AC ϭ 849 lb C, AD ϭ 849 lb C, DE ϭ 849 lb T
AB ϭ BE ϭ CD ϭ 1 kN T
AE ϭ BD ϭ 1.414 kN C
BC ϭ 2 kN T, DE ϭ 1 kN C
AB ϭ DE ϭ 96.0 kN C, AH ϭ EF ϭ 75 kN T
BC ϭ CD ϭ 75 kN C
BH ϭ DF ϭ CG ϭ 60 kN T, CH ϭ CF ϭ 48.0 kN C
GH ϭ FG ϭ 112.5 kN T
AB ϭ 14.42 kN T, AC ϭ 2.07 kN C, AD ϭ 0
BC ϭ 6.45 kN T, BD ϭ 12.89 kN C

4/9

4/10
4/11
4/12

4/13

4/14

AB ϭ 12 kN T, AE ϭ 3 kN C, BC ϭ 5.20 kN T
BD ϭ 6 kN T, BE ϭ 5.20 kN C
CD ϭ DE ϭ 6 kN C
AB ϭ 1000 lb T, AE ϭ BC ϭ DE ϭ 707 lb T
DF ϭ 1000 lb C, BE ϭ CD ϭ EF ϭ 707 lb C
L
AB ϭ BC ϭ T, BD ϭ 0
2
AB ϭ 6.61 kN T, AE ϭ 21.0 kN T
BE ϭ CD ϭ 12.62 kN C, BC ϭ 2.00 kN T
CE ϭ 12.62 kN T, DE ϭ 7 kN T
AE ϭ CD ϭ 2000 /Ί3 lb C
AB ϭ BC ϭ 1000 /Ί3 lb T
BE ϭ BD ϭ 800/Ί3 lb T, DE ϭ 1400/Ί3 lb C
AB ϭ 9Ί3 kN C, AE ϭ 5Ί3 kN T
26
Ί3 kN C, BD ϭ 3Ί3 kN C
3
7
BE ϭ Ί3 kN C
3
13
11
CD ϭ Ί3 kN T, DE ϭ Ί3 kN T
3
3
BC ϭ

Problem Answers

4/15

4/16

4/17
4/18

4/19
4/20
4/21

4/22

4/23

4/24
4/25

4/26
᭤ 4/27
᭤ 4/28
᭤ 4/29
᭤ 4/30
4/31
4/32
4/33
4/34
4/35
4/36
4/37
4/38
4/39
4/40
4/41

EF ϭ 3.87 kips C, DE ϭ 4.61 kips T
DF ϭ 4.37 kips C, CD ϭ 2.73 kips T
FG ϭ 7.28 kips C
(a) BD slack, AB ϭ AD ϭ 0, BC ϭ L C
3L
5L
T, CD ϭ
C
AC ϭ
4
4
(b) BD slack, AB ϭ AD ϭ BC ϭ 0
5L
3L
C, AC ϭ
T
CD ϭ
4
4
AB ϭ BC ϭ 3.73 kN C, AD ϭ 4.23 kN T
BD ϭ 3.73 kN T, CD ϭ 3.23 kN T
AB ϭ BC ϭ L T, AF ϭ EF ϭ L C
L
DE ϭ CD ϭ T, BF ϭ DF ϭ BD ϭ 0
2
AB ϭ 2.69 kN C, BH ϭ 5.39 kN C, BG ϭ 0
CF ϭ 1538 lb C, CG ϭ 4170 lb T, EF ϭ 0
AB ϭ DE ϭ BC ϭ CD ϭ 3.35 kN C
AH ϭ EF ϭ 3 kN T, BH ϭ DF ϭ 1 kN C
CF ϭ CH ϭ 1.414 kN T, CG ϭ 0
FG ϭ GH ϭ 2 kN T
AB ϭ DE ϭ 3.35 kN C, BC ϭ CD ϭ 2.24 kN C
AH ϭ EF ϭ GH ϭ FG ϭ 3 kN T
BH ϭ DF ϭ 0, CG ϭ 1 kN T
BG ϭ DG ϭ 1.118 kN C
AB ϭ AH ϭ 130.7 lb T, BO ϭ HO ϭ 58.6 lb C
BC ϭ GH ϭ 207 lb T, CO ϭ GO ϭ 200 lb C
CD ϭ FG ϭ 315 lb T, DO ϭ FO ϭ 341 lb C
DE ϭ EF ϭ 392 lb T, EO ϭ 400 lb C
FD ϭ 24,500 lb T
AB ϭ CD ϭ 8.50 kN T, AF ϭ 15.47 kN C
BC ϭ 12.01 kN T, BF ϭ 0.759 kN C
CE ϭ 0, CF ϭ 8.50 kN C
DE ϭ EF ϭ 9.81 kN C
GJ ϭ 4.44 tons C, GI ϭ 15.38 tons T
CG ϭ 0
AB ϭ 3.89 kN C, DB ϭ 0, CD ϭ 0.932 kN C
EF ϭ 75.1 kN C, KL ϭ 40 kN T, GL ϭ 20 kN T
CM ϭ 3.41L T
CG ϭ 14.14 kips T
CG ϭ 0, GH ϭ L T
BE ϭ 5.59 kN T
EF ϭ 0.751L T
AB ϭ 7.2 kN T, BG ϭ 3 kN C, GF ϭ 7.8 kN C
BC ϭ 4.32L T, CF ϭ 1.278L C, EF ϭ 2.53L C
DG ϭ L T
2L
2L
BC ϭ BE ϭ
T, BF ϭ
C
Ί3
Ί3
BG ϭ 400Ί5 lb C, BF ϭ 800 lb T
L
BC ϭ CG ϭ T
3
BC ϭ 150 lb T, FG ϭ 150 lb C

4/42
4/43
4/44
4/45
4/46
4/47
4/48
4/49
4/50
4/51
4/52
4/53
4/54
4/55
᭤ 4/56
᭤ 4/57
᭤ 4/58

4/59
4/60
4/61
4/62
4/63
4/64
4/65
4/66
4/67
4/68
4/69
4/70
4/71
᭤ 4/72

4/73
4/74
4/75
4/76
4/77
4/78
4/79
4/80

L
T
5
BC ϭ 3.00 kN C, CJ ϭ 16.22 kN C
CI ϭ 5.00 kN T, HI ϭ 10.50 kN T
2L
C, GF ϭ LΊ3 C
CG ϭ
Ί3
BH ϭ 0.683L T, CD ϭ 1.932L C
FN ϭ GM ϭ 84.8 kN T, MN ϭ 20 kN T
AB ϭ 3.78 kN C
GM ϭ 0
BE ϭ 0.787L T
DJ ϭ 0.45L T, EJ ϭ 0.360L T
DE ϭ 297 kN C, EI ϭ 26.4 kN T
FI ϭ 205 kN T, HI ϭ 75.9 kN T
HP ϭ 2.57L T
BC ϭ 100 kN C, CG ϭ 0, EF ϭ 45.7 kN T
FG ϭ 25 kN T
CG ϭ 0
JQ ϭ 57.7 kN C
DF ϭ 768 kN C, EF ϭ 364 kN C
Ax ϭ 101.1 kN right
DG ϭ 0.569L C
FI ϭ ER ϭ 0, FJ ϭ 7.81 kN T
EJ ϭ 3.61 kN C, EK ϭ 22.4 kN C
AB ϭ Ϫ4.46 kN, AC ϭ Ϫ1.521 kN
AD ϭ 1.194 kN
BC ϭ BD ϭ CD ϭ 55.6 lb
CD ϭ 2.4L
Bx ϭ P
AC ϭ 0.283L, BD ϭ 0
AC ϭ 0.567L, BD ϭ Ϫ1.014L
Ί13
P
AF ϭ
P, Dx ϭ
3Ί2
3Ί2
2
AD ϭ Ϫ0.625L, DG ϭ Ϫ2.5L
5
4
AB ϭ Ϫ mg, AC ϭ Ϫ mg
27
54
LΊ3
LΊ2
, CD ϭ 0, CE ϭ Ϫ
BC ϭ
4
2
BC ϭ CD ϭ DE ϭ EF ϭ BF ϭ 0.681L
BE ϭ Ϫ2.36 kN
P
P
, EG ϭ
FE ϭ Ϫ
Ί3
Ί6
B ϭ 4170 lb
M ϭ 150 lb-ft, Ax ϭ 86.6 lb
Ax ϭ Cx ϭ 0.293P, Ay ϭ P, Cy ϭ 0
DG ϭ

(a) F ϭ 900(cos 30Њ i ϩ sin 30Њ j) N
(b) F ϭ 779i N
F ϭ 217 N, A ϭ 297 N
C ϭ 6470 N
EF ϭ 100 N T, F ϭ 300 N
F ϭ 125.3P

513

514

Problem Answers

4/81

on AB: Bx ϭ 0.833 kN left, By ϭ 0.833 kN up
Ax ϭ 0.833 kN right, Ay ϭ 4.16 kN up
D ϭ 58.5 N
F ϭ 25 lb
P ϭ 217 N
N ϭ 166.4 N
N ϭ 13.19P
B ϭ 68.8 N
R ϭ 1111 lb
b
QϭP
a
AB ϭ 7400 lb C, EF ϭ 0
P ϭ 127.8 N
A ϭ 315 kN
A ϭ 999 N, F ϭ 314 N up
24
L
Tϭ
35
F ϭ 45.4P
AB ϭ 5310 N C, C ϭ 4670 N
P ϭ 2050 N
C ϭ 1368 N
p ϭ 267 kPa
AB ϭ 1650 lb T
Ex ϭ 1308 N, Ey ϭ 122.6 N
MA ϭ 9.94 N ⅐ m CCW
AB ϭ 142.8 kN C
CD ϭ 127.8 kN C
P ϭ 147.4 N
A ϭ 34,000 lb, D ϭ 17,100 lb
F ϭ 1.063 kN, P ϭ 1.260 kN
C ϭ 1229 lb, An ϭ Bn ϭ 692 lb
C ϭ 2090 lb, By ϭ 1012 lb
A ϭ 833 N, R ϭ 966 N
C ϭ 77.2 lb
Ί2 PL
Tϭ x
E ϭ 820 N
A ϭ 4550 N, B ϭ 4410 N, C ϭ D ϭ 1898 N
E ϭ F ϭ 5920 N
Ay ϭ 75 N, By ϭ 150 N, Dy ϭ 225 N
Bx ϭ Dx ϭ Ex ϭ 173.2 N, Ey ϭ 750 N
Gx ϭ 0, Gy ϭ 525 N
FAB ϭ 6710 lb
Fs ϭ 45.2 N
A ϭ 1.748 kN
C ϭ 249 N
C ϭ 235 N
AB ϭ 9200 N C
HJ ϭ 6220 N C
AB ϭ 17,140 lb C, O ϭ 16,590 lb
CE ϭ 7440 lb C
F ϭ 131.8 kN, H ϭ 113.9 kN

4/82
4/83
4/84
4/85
4/86
4/87
4/88
4/89
4/90
4/91
4/92
4/93
4/94
4/95
4/96
4/97
4/98
4/99
4/100
4/101
4/102
4/103
4/104
4/105
4/106
4/107
4/108
4/109
4/110
4/111
4/112
4/113
4/114
4/115

4/116
4/117
4/118
4/119
4/120
4/121
4/122
4/123
4/124
4/125

4/126
4/127
᭤ 4/128
4/129
4/130
4/131
4/132
4/133

4/134
4/135
4/136
4/137
4/138
4/139
4/140
4/141
4/142
4/143
᭤ 4/144
᭤ 4/145
᭤ 4/146
᭤ 4/147

*4/148
*4/149
*4/150

M ϭ 17.08 N ⅐ m CCW
P ϭ 338 lb, E ϭ 75.1 lb
P ϭ 26,900 lb, A ϭ 14,600 lb
Ax ϭ 0.833 kN, Ay ϭ 5.25 kN
Az ϭ Ϫ12.50 kN
T ϭ 1569 lb, EF ϭ 429 lb T
BE ϭ 7 kN T
F ϭ 1478 lb
AB ϭ DE ϭ 13.52 kips C
AF ϭ EF ϭ 11.25 kips T
BC ϭ CD ϭ 9.01 kips C
BF ϭ DF ϭ 4.51 kips C, CF ϭ 5 kips T
G ϭ 181.8 N
CE ϭ 655 N C, DE ϭ 1057 N T
DF ϭ 2250 N C
CH ϭ 0, CD ϭ 4.74 kN C, AH ϭ 4.5 kN T
C ϭ PΊ2
M ϭ 1250 lb- in. CCW
BF ϭ 24.3 kN T
4L
2L
T, CG ϭ
T
BG ϭ
3Ί3
3Ί3
AB ϭ 2.26L T, BI ϭ L T, CI ϭ 0.458L T
AB ϭ 1.850L T, BI ϭ L T, CI ϭ 0.833L T
AB ϭ 59,900 lb C, p ϭ 3420 lb /in.2
BE ϭ 1.275 kN T
Rx ϭ 838 lb, Ry ϭ 43.3 lb
GJ ϭ 70.8 kN C, FJ ϭ 0
Ί2L
Ί2L
, DA ϭ Ϫ
AB ϭ Ϫ
4
8
(FA)max ϭ 6 kN at ␪ ϭ Ϫ26.6Њ
60
Cϭ
(lb)
sin ␪
Rmax ϭ 1314 lb at ␪ ϭ 45Њ

΂

΃
Ί3
AC ϭ 4΂Ϫcos ␪ ϩ
sin ␪΃
3
Ί3
sin ␪΃
BC ϭ 2Ί3΂cos ␪ ϩ
3

*4/151 AB ϭ Ϫ4 cos ␪ ϩ

Ί3
sin ␪
3

*4/152 (AC)min ϭ 2.60 kN T at ␣ ϭ 30Њ
(CD)min ϭ 6 kN C at ␣ ϭ 0
*4/153 (FDE)max ϭ 3580 N at ␪ ϭ 0
(FDE)min ϭ 0 at ␪max ϭ 65.9Њ
sin (␪ Ϫ 22.6Њ)
*4/154 (a) BC ϭ Ϫ260
cos ␪
(b) BC ϭ 0 when ␪ ϭ 22.6Њ
(c) 0 Յ ␪ Յ 77.7Њ
*4/155 (FBC)max ϭ 2800 N at ␪ ϭ 5Њ
*4/156 ␪ ϭ 0: R ϭ 75 000 N, AB ϭ 211 000 N
Cx ϭ Ϫ85 400 N
Rmin ϭ 49 400 N at ␪ ϭ 23.2Њ

Problem Answers

515

Chapter 5
5/1
5/2
5/3
5/4
5/5
5/6
5/7
5/8
5/9
5/10
5/11
5/12
5/13
5/14
5/15
5/16
5/17
5/18
5/19
5/20
5/21
5/22
5/23

5/24
5/25
5/26
5/27
5/28

(5.67, 3.67)

5/29

x ϭ 0, y ϭ 110.3 mm
(0, Ϫ50.9, Ϫ180) mm
(Ϫ50.9, 120, 69.1) mm
␪ ϭ 32.5Њ
14R
yϭ
9␲
2(h3 Ϫ a3)
yϭ
3( h 2 Ϫ a 2)
xϭ

h(a ϩ 2b)

,yϭ

5/30
5/31
5/32
5/33

(a2 ϩ ab ϩ b2)
3(a ϩ b)

3(a ϩ b)
x ϭ 1.549, y ϭ 0.756
3b
3a
xϭ ,yϭ
10
4
2a
␲b
xϭ ␲,yϭ
8
7a
a
,yϭ
xϭ
␲Ϫ1
6(␲ Ϫ 1)
3b
3a
xϭ ,yϭ
5
8
3h
zϭ
4
x ϭ 2.05, y ϭ 0.405
h(2a ϩ b)
a2 ϩ b2 ϩ ab
,yϭ
xϭ
3(a ϩ b)
3(a ϩ b)
2a
3b
xϭ ,yϭ
5
8
2a
23b
xϭ ,yϭ
5
50
4
x ϭ ft
9
2a
xϭyϭ
3(␲ Ϫ 2)
17L
xϭ
28
12a
3a
,yϭ
xϭ
25
7
a
b
,yϭ
xϭ
␲
␲
Ϫ1
Ϫ1
3
3
2
2

΂

΃

΂

x ϭ 0.777a, y ϭ 0.223a
8
in., z ϭ 5 in.
xϭyϭϪ
3␲
103b
yϭ
350
31b
yϭ
90
a
7a
xϭ
,yϭ
␲Ϫ1
6(␲ Ϫ 1)

΃

5/34
5/35
5/36
5/37
5/38
5/39
᭤ 5/40
᭤ 5/41

14Ί2
a
9␲
5a
zϭ
8
h ϭ 1.633 in.
4
xϭ
(a ϩ b)
3␲
11h
hϭ
56
25R
3R
R
, h ϭ 0: x ϭ
hϭ :xϭ
4
48
8
5R
xϭ
8
3h
yϭ
8
z ϭ 263 mm
y ϭ 57.4 mm
h
yϭ␲
r
zϭ
2
2 2
(a Ϫ h2)3/2
3
yϭ
␲
h
a2 Ϫ sinϪ1
Ϫ hΊa2 Ϫ h2
a
2
yϭ

΂

΃

᭤ 5/42

y ϭ 0.380a

᭤ 5/43

4 3
a
x ϭ y ϭ ␲ Ϫ a, z ϭ
4
4

᭤ 5/44
᭤ 5/45
᭤ 5/46

x ϭ 1.542R
x ϭ 1.583R
x ϭ y ϭ 0.242a
X ϭ 132.1 mm, Y ϭ 75.8 mm
X ϭ 2.55 in., Y ϭ 1.362 in.
X ϭ 233 mm, Y ϭ 333 mm
4h3 Ϫ 2Ί3a3
Yϭ
6h2 Ϫ Ί3␲a2
X ϭ 244 mm, Y ϭ 117.7 mm
Y ϭ 9.93 in.
X ϭ Y ϭ 0, Z ϭ 0.389r
X ϭ 3.50 in., Y ϭ 7.83 in.
X ϭ 4.56 in., Y ϭ 3.14 in.
Y ϭ 95.6 mm
H ϭ 39.3 mm
3b
4b
3b
Xϭ ,Yϭ ,Zϭ
10
5
10
13a
XϭYϭZϭ
28
Y ϭ 5.35 in.
X ϭ Ϫ8.26 mm, Y ϭ Ϫ31.4 mm, Z ϭ 10.33 mm

5/47
5/48
5/49
5/50
5/51
5/52
5/53
5/54
5/55
5/56
5/57
5/58
5/59
5/60
5/61

΂

΃

516

5/62
5/63
5/64
5/65
5/66
5/67
5/68
5/69
5/70
5/71
5/72
5/73
5/74
5/75
᭤ 5/76
5/77
5/78
5/79
5/80
5/81
5/82
5/83
5/84
5/85
5/86
5/87
5/88
5/89
5/90
5/91
5/92
5/93
5/94
5/95
5/96
5/97
5/98
5/99
5/100
5/101
5/102
5/103
5/104
5/105
5/106
5/107

Problem Answers
45R
112
X ϭ 0.395b, Y ϭ 0.25b, Z ϭ 0.345b
X ϭ 347 mm, Y ϭ Ϫ90.5 mm
X ϭ Ϫ33.3 mm, Y ϭ 20 mm, Z ϭ 16.36 mm
X ϭ 58.4 mm, Y ϭ Z ϭ 40 mm
X ϭ 1.595 in., Z ϭ 1.559 in.
l ϭ (8 Ϫ ␲)r
3a
2a
␲a
,YϭϪ
,Zϭ
Xϭ
6ϩ␲
6ϩ␲
6ϩ␲
Z ϭ 0.642R
Z ϭ 0.671R
X ϭ 0.475a, Y ϭ 0.424a, Z ϭ Ϫ0.1008a
X ϭ 56.4 mm, Y ϭ 95.0 mm, Z ϭ 56.8 mm
X ϭ 2.48 in., Y ϭ 2.71 in., Z ϭ Ϫ0.882 in.
Y ϭ 28.8 mm
X ϭ Ϫ0.509L, Y ϭ 0.0443R, Z ϭ Ϫ0.01834R
A ϭ 10 300 mm2, V ϭ 24 700 mm3
V ϭ 0.345(106) mm3
V ϭ 2.83(105) mm3
A ϭ 2Ί2␲a2
2␲Ί2a3
Vϭ
3
8.82 gal
m ϭ 0.228 kg
A ϭ 177 100 mm2
m ϭ 0.293 kg
A ϭ 29.3 in.2, V ϭ 6.56 in.3
A ϭ 1074 in.2
A ϭ ␲r2(␲ Ϫ 1)
m ϭ 0.639 kg
A ϭ ␲a2(␲ Ϫ 2)
m ϭ 84.5 kg
r ϭ 77.8 mm
A ϭ 157.9 in.2
V ϭ 361 000 mm3
A ϭ 105 800 mm2, V ϭ 1.775(106) mm3
A ϭ 89.3 in.2, V ϭ 33.1 in.3
b␲
V ϭ 4bc a ϩ
8
A ϭ 4.62 m2
W ϭ 608 kN
m ϭ 1.126(106) Mg
Ax ϭ 0, Ay ϭ 625 N, By ϭ 1375 N
RA ϭ 13.33 lb up, RB ϭ 207 lb up
RA ϭ 6 kN up, MA ϭ 3 kN ⅐ m CW
RA ϭ 360 lb up, MA ϭ 2880 lb- ft CCW
Ax ϭ 750 N, Ay ϭ 3.07 kN, By ϭ 1.224 kN
RA ϭ 2230 N up, RB ϭ 2170 N up
w0L
RA ϭ RB ϭ
up
4
Xϭ

΂

΃

2w0L
5w0L
, By ϭ
9
18
MO ϭ 6600 lb-ft CCW
RA ϭ 5.5 kips down, MA ϭ 71.5 kip-ft CW
RA ϭ 24.1 kN up, RB ϭ 19.87 kN up
P ϭ 6.96 kN
2w0l
w0l2
RA ϭ ␲ up, MA ϭ ␲ CCW
2w0l
w0l2
up, MA ϭ
CCW
RA ϭ
3
3
RA ϭ 14.29 kN down, RB ϭ 14.29 kN up
RA ϭ 3.8 kN up, MA ϭ 10.20 kN ⅐ m CCW
A ϭ 2.5 kN, B ϭ 6.61 kN
RA ϭ 667 lb up, RB ϭ 1167 lb up
A y ϭ 34.7 kN, MA ϭ 76 kN ⅐ m CCW
RA ϭ 1900 lb up, RB ϭ 1600 lb up
2w0l
2w0l2
up, MA ϭ
CW
Ax ϭ 0, A y ϭ
3
5
Bx ϭ 4 kN, By ϭ 1.111 kN up, Ay ϭ 5.56 kN up
RA ϭ RB ϭ 7 kN up
CA ϭ VA ϭ pr, MA ϭ pr2 CCW
P
Pl
l
xϭ :Vϭ ,Mϭ
2
3
6
ϪPl
Mϭ
2
MB ϭ Ϫ1488 lb-ft
d ϭ 2.67 m
V ϭ ϪC/l
M0
3M0
,Mϭ
Vϭ
4
2l
MC ϭ Ϫ1667 lb-ft
3l
5Pl
at x ϭ
Mmax ϭ
16
4
5Pl
Mmax ϭ
6
M ϭ Ϫ1 kN ⅐ m
wl2
Mmax ϭ
8
Mmax ϭ 3000 lb-ft
M ϭ 4800 lb-ft
V ϭ 2.4 kN, M ϭ Ϫ4.8 kN ⅐ m
w ϭ Ϫ2200 ϩ 120x2, M ϭ 6400 lb-ft
w0l2
MA ϭ Ϫ
3
w0l2
Mmax ϭ
12
w0L2
Mmax ϭ
24
L
aϩl
, (MA)max ϭ (l Ϫ a)2
xϭ
2
4l
M ϭ ϪFh
MB ϭ Ϫ0.40 kN ⅐ m, x ϭ 0.2 m

5/108 Ax ϭ 0, Ay ϭ
5/109
5/110
5/111
5/112
5/113
5/114
5/115
5/116
5/117
5/118
5/119
5/120
5/121
5/122
5/123
᭤ 5/124
5/125
5/126
5/127
5/128
5/129
5/130
5/131
5/132
5/133
5/134
5/135
5/136
5/137
5/138
5/139
5/140
5/141
5/142
5/143
5/144
5/145

Problem Answers
5/146 V ϭ 1467 lb, M ϭ Ϫ200 lb- ft
5/147 V ϭ Ϫ600 N, M ϭ 4800 N ⅐ m
Mmax ϭ 5620 N ⅐ m at x ϭ 4.25 m
5/148 V ϭ Ϫ1400 N, M ϭ 0
Mmax ϭ 2800 N ⅐ m at x ϭ 3.25 m
5/149 T ϭ 500 N, V ϭ Ϫ62.5 N, M ϭ 64.4 N ⅐ m
5/150 V ϭ Ϫ9 kN, M ϭ Ϫ15 kN ⅐ m
RA ϭ 28 kN up, RB ϭ 16 kN down
5/151 V ϭ 2000 – 100x Ϫ x3
1
M ϭ Ϫ12,500 ϩ 2000x Ϫ 50x2 Ϫ x4
4
5/152 V ϭ 1.6 kN, M ϭ Ϫ2.33 kN ⅐ m

΂3l Ϫ x ϩ 4x ΃
3l
xl x
x
l
M ϭ w ΂Ϫ ϩ Ϫ ϩ
16
3
2
3l ΃
3

5/153 V ϭ w0

2

2

2

4

0

2

2

᭤ 5/154 x ϭ 0.207L, Mmax ϭ 0.0214wL

5/155
5/156
5/157
*5/158
5/159
*5/160
5/161
5/162
5/163
᭤ 5/165
᭤ 5/166
᭤ 5/167
5/168
*5/169
*5/170
*5/171
*5/172
5/173
*5/174
*5/175
*5/176
*5/177
*5/178
*5/179
*5/180
*5/181
*5/182
*5/183
᭤*5/184
5/185
5/186
5/187
5/188

y ϭ 0.750 in.
T0 ϭ 50.0(106) lb, C ϭ 44.7(106) lb
T0 ϭ 18 lb at C, Tmax ϭ 51.3 lb at A and B
TA ϭ 58 100 N, TB ϭ 58 800 N
m ϭ 270 kg, AC ϭ 79.1 m
m ϭ 282 kg, AC ϭ 79.6 m
T0 ϭ 33.7 kN, TA ϭ 37.4 kN, TB ϭ 40.8 kN
w0l2
w1 Ϫ w0
T0 ϭ
1ϩ
3w0
2h
2
y ϭ (123.5x Ϫ 0.01372x4)10Ϫ4 ft
TC ϭ 236 lb, L ϭ 23.0 ft
L ϭ 46.2 m
Catenary: T0 ϭ 408 lb; Parabolic: T0 ϭ 400 lb
l ϭ 49.7 ft
L ϭ 33.0 ft
T ϭ 1665 N, s ϭ 32.1 m
h ϭ 3.36 m, Th ϭ 3.36 N, Tv ϭ 0.756 N
Th ϭ 8.53 N, Tv ϭ 2.06 N
s ϭ 251 m, H ϭ 24.5 m
T ϭ 3770 N, h ϭ 33.8 m
h ϭ 2.69 m, ␪ ϭ 55.9Њ
TA ϭ 736 N, TB ϭ 2310 N
T0 ϭ 1210 N
T0 ϭ 6630 N, T ϭ 6690 N
L ϭ 13.06 m, TB ϭ 229 N, ␪A ϭ 12.64Њ
␪A ϭ 16.98Њ, ␪B ϭ 28.0Њ, TA ϭ 355 N
TB ϭ 384 N
(a) LP ϭ 11.32 m, (b) LC ϭ 11.40 m
␦ ϭ 0.724 m
n ϭ 29.0%
xB ϭ 125.0 m, yB ϭ Ϫ33.6 m
0.872 lb, 1 lb
V ϭ 5.71 m3
r ϭ 0.8, r ϭ 0.577
m ϭ 90.2 kg

΂

΃

5/189
5/190
5/191
5/192
5/193
5/194
5/195
5/196
5/197
5/198
5/199
5/200

h ϭ 1.988 m
C ϭ 95.5 kN
␴ ϭ 462 MPa
T ϭ 26.7 N
␳
h
␪ ϭ sinϪ1
L ␳Ј
␴ ϭ 10.74 kPa, P ϭ 1.687 kN
P ϭ 12.57 kN
C ϭ 2.04 kN
T ϭ 8960 lb
h ϭ 2.75 in.
C ϭ 666 lb
T ϭ 121.6 lb, h ϭ 4.42 ft

΂ Ί ΃

h
΂2r΃ ΂3 Ϫ h΃
r

5/201 ␳s ϭ ␳l
5/202
5/203
5/204
5/205
5/206
5/207
5/208
5/209
5/210
5/211
5/212
5/213
᭤ 5/214
5/216
5/217
5/218
5/219
5/220

5/221
5/222
5/223
5/224
5/225
5/226
5/227
5/228
5/229
5/230

2

h ϭ aΊ3
M ϭ 11.22(104) lb-ft
d ϭ 5.77 in.
R ϭ 562 lb, H ϭ 2.25 ft
T ϭ 609 lb
1
Q ϭ ␲rp0
2
A requires 12,470 lb /ft less than B
R ϭ 156.0(106) lb
m ϭ 6.57 kg
␴ ϭ 262 kPa, ⌬T ϭ 1192 N
␪ ϭ 48.2Њ
d ϭ 0.300 m
m ϭ 4.24 Mg
GM ϭ 0.530 m
X ϭ 93.3 mm, Y ϭ 66.7 mm
23b
2b
,yϭ
xϭ
25
5
X ϭ 0.1263r, Y ϭ 0.1036r
s(2 ϩ 2 sin ␪ ϩ sin ␪ cos ␪)
Xϭ
2(1 ϩ sin ␪)
s
Y ϭ (1 ϩ sin ␪)
2
m ϭ 1.183 kg
m ϭ 11.55 kg
V ϭ 280 000 mm3, A ϭ 30 900 mm2
Y ϭ 0.461b, Z ϭ 0.876b
X ϭ 1.845 mm, Y ϭ 0
Z ϭ 6.02 mm, m ϭ 0.0693 kg
X ϭ 24.4 mm, Y ϭ 60 mm
Z ϭ 29.7 mm, m ϭ 0.932 kg
2h
4r
xϭ ,zϭ
3
3␲
S ϭ 147.9 ft
h ϭ rΊ3
15a
yϭ
14␲

517

518

Problem Answers
11H
28
4H
hϭ
9
5H
hϭ
16
P ϭ 348 kN
Mmax ϭ 500 lb-ft at x ϭ 6 ft
Mmax ϭ 186.4 N ⅐ m at x ϭ 0.879 m, 5.12 m
M ϭ Ϫ11.12 N ⅐ m, V ϭ 55.6 N
V ϭ 2.8 kN, M ϭ 6.53 kN ⅐ m, T ϭ 1.867 kN ⅐ m

5/231 h ϭ
5/232
5/233
5/234
5/235
5/236
5/237
5/238

5/239 P ϭ

΂

␳gab
a
hϩ
6
2

΃

5/240 A ϭ 1.440(106) lb, M ϭ 7.78(108) lb-ft

᭤ 5/241 V ϭ 0.931(106) lb, M ϭ 2.21(108) lb-ft

* 5/242 ␪ ϭ 46.8Њ
* 5/243 y ϭ 3.74
* 5/244 Vmax ϭ 1900 lb at x ϭ 0
Mmax ϭ 9080 lb-ft at x ϭ 9.63 ft
* 5/245 Xmax ϭ 322 mm at x ϭ 322 mm
* 5/246 ␳ ϭ 8.63 kg/m
* 5/247 sag ϭ 3.98 m at 393 m right of A
TA ϭ 175 800 N, TB ϭ 169 900 N
* 5/248 d ϭ 197.7 m, horizontal thruster
Th ϭ 10 N, Tv ϭ 1.984 N

Chapter 6
6/1
6/2
6/3
6/4

6/5
6/6
6/7
6/8
6/9
6/10
6/11
6/12
6/13
6/14
6/15
6/16
6/17
6/18
6/19
6/20
6/21
6/22
6/23
6/24
6/25
6/26
6/27
6/28

F ϭ 85 lb left
F ϭ 379 N left
␪ ϭ 4.57Њ
(a) F ϭ 66.0 N
(b) P ϭ 516 N
(c) F ϭ 148.5 N
Pslip ϭ 0.448mg, Ptip ϭ 0.536mg
(a) F ϭ 46.4 lb up
(b) F ϭ 40 lb up
␮s ϭ 0.0959, F ϭ 0.0883mg, P ϭ 0.1766mg
␮s ϭ 0.1763
FA ϭ FB ϭ 126.6 N, xmax ϭ 86.2 mm
␪ ϭ 16.75Њ, P ϭ 12 N
(a) ␪ ϭ 26.6Њ, (b) ␪ ϭ 18.43Њ, (c) ␪ ϭ 8.13Њ
M ϭ 19.81 N ⅐ m
␮min ϭ 0.630, ␪ ϭ 32.2Њ
d Յ 0.2L
␮s ϭ 0.25: ␪ ϭ 63.4Њ
␮s ϭ 0.50: ␪ ϭ 45Њ
␮s ϭ 0.25: ␪ ϭ 61.8Њ
␮s ϭ 0.50: ␪ ϭ 40.9Њ
m1
␮ , ␮ Ͻ 0.533
␮2 Ͻ
m1 ϩ m2 1 2
Slips first: a Ͼ ␮b; tips first: a Ͻ ␮b
(a) ␪ ϭ 8.09Њ, (b) ␪ ϭ 26.2Њ
(a) and (b) P ϭ 19.2 lb
M ϭ 76.3 N ⅐ m
␮ ϭ 0.268
(a) P ϭ 14.7 lb, (b) P ϭ 36.8 lb
M ϭ 2.94 N ⅐ m
3.05 Յ W Յ 31.7 lb
(a) 445 N, (b) 321 N
s ϭ 2.55 m
␮s ϭ 0.365

6/29
6/30
6/31
6/32
6/33
6/34
6/35
6/36
6/37
6/38
6/39
6/40
6/41
6/42

6/43
6/44
6/45
6/46
6/47
6/48
6/49
6/50
6/51

␮s ϭ 0.287
␮s ϭ 0.1575
h ϭ 156.6 mm, N ϭ 1333 N
F ϭ 400 lb
␪ ϭ 20.7Њ
20.5 Յ W Յ 112.9 lb
aϩb
␪ ϭ tanϪ1 ␮
a
3␲␮s
2
,␮ ϭ
␪ ϭ sinϪ1
4 – 3␲␮s s 3␲
(a) P ϭ 24.5 N, (b) P ϭ 109.1 N
␮s ϭ 0.268
a Ϫ b␮s
xϭ
2␮s
l
2.37 Յ Յ 8.14
d
␪ ϭ 6.29Њ

΂

΃

P ϭ mgΊ␮s2 cos2 ␪ Ϫ sin2 ␪
mg sin ␪
␤ ϭ tanϪ1
P
M b
Ϫe
Pϭ
rl ␮s
(a) ␪ ϭ Ϫ8.02Њ, (b) ␪ ϭ 8.85Њ
P ϭ 22.1 kN
R ϭ 8.81 kN
␮s ϭ 0.1264
␮s ϭ 0.761
␮s ϭ 0.0824, 40.2 N
(␮s)min ϭ 0.25 at A, (␮s)min ϭ 0.389 at B
R ϭ 1291 lb
(a) ␪min ϭ 61.2Њ, (␮s)B ϭ 1.667
(b) ␪min ϭ 45Њ, (␮s)B ϭ 0.667
(c) ␪min ϭ 10.30Њ, (␮s)B ϭ 0.0952

΂

΂

΃

΃

Problem Answers

6/52
6/53
6/54
6/55
6/56
6/57
6/58
6/59
6/60
6/61
6/62
6/63
6/64
6/65
6/66
6/67
6/68
6/69
6/70
6/71
6/72
6/73
᭤ 6/74
6/75
6/76
6/77
6/78
6/79
6/80
6/81
6/82
6/83
6/84
6/85
6/86
6/87
6/88
6/89
6/90
6/91
6/92
6/93
6/94
6/95
᭤ 6/96
6/97

k ϭ 20.8(103) N /m
␮s ϭ 0.1763
␮s ϭ 0.0262
N ϭ 5.66 threads per inch
NU ϭ 53.5 lb, NL ϭ 50.8 lb
␮s ϭ 0.265
␮s ϭ 0.3, FA ϭ 1294 N
P ϭ 449 N
P ϭ 4.53 kN
PЈ ϭ 3.51 kN
M ϭ 24.8 lb- in.
(a) F ϭ 8.52 N, (b) F ϭ 3.56 N
P ϭ 333 N
P ϭ 105.1 N
(a) P ϭ 49.4 lb, (b) P ϭ 69.4 lb
(a) PЈ ϭ 6.45 lb left, (b) PЈ ϭ 13.55 lb right
FA ϭ FB ϭ 24.6 N, P ϭ 98.6 N
p ϭ 2400 kPa
M ϭ 7.30 N ⅐ m
MЈ ϭ 3.02 N ⅐ m
M ϭ 30.9 N ⅐ m
(a) P ϭ 78.6 N, (b) P ϭ 39.6 N
␮ ϭ 0.1222
␮ ϭ 0.271
(a) ␮ ϭ 0.1947, (b) rƒ ϭ 3.82 mm
M ϭ 96 lb- in., ␮ ϭ 0.3
T ϭ 4020 N, T0 ϭ 3830 N
T ϭ 3830 N, T0 ϭ 4020 N
␮ ϭ 0.609, ␾ ϭ 31.3Њ
(a) P ϭ 50 lb, (b) P ϭ 52.9 lb
P ϭ 47.2 lb, No
ro Ϫ ri
M ϭ ␮L
ln(ro /ri)
T ϭ 258 N
T ϭ 233 N
1
M ϭ ␮PR
2
T ϭ 56.4 N
F ϭ 136.1 N
4␮P Ro3 Ϫ Ri3
Mϭ
3 Ro2 Ϫ Ri2
T ϭ 1069 N, T1 ϭ 1013 N, T2 ϭ 949 N
T ϭ 899 N, T1 ϭ 949 N, T2 ϭ 1013 N
5
M ϭ ␮La
8
2
M ϭ ␮0La
5
␮ ϭ 0.204
M ϭ 335 N ⅐ m
M ϭ ␮Pr
␮ ϭ 0.221

6/98
6/99
6/100
6/101
6/102
6/103
6/104
6/105
6/106
6/107

(a) P ϭ 1007 N, (b) P ϭ 152.9 N

␮ ϭ 0.228
T ϭ 2.11 kN
(a) ␮ ϭ 0.620, (b) PЈ ϭ 3.44 kN
P ϭ 320 N
Px ϭ 55.2 N
T ϭ 1720 lb
P ϭ 3.30 kN
W ϭ 24.5 lb
P ϭ 23.7 lb
mg
6/108 (a) Ta ϭ
sin ␪(1 ϩ eϪ2␮␪)
mg
(b) Tb ϭ
sin ␪(1 ϩ e2␮␪)
6/109 T ϭ mge␲␮

␲ T
T
*6/110 ␪ ϭ 0: mg ϭ 6.59, ␪ l : mg l e␲␮B
2
6/111 P ϭ 142.0 lb
6/112 ␮ ϭ 0.768
6/113 M ϭ 1834 lb-in.
6/114 h ϭ 27.8 mm
6/115 8.66 Յ W Յ 94.3 lb
6/116 ␮ ϭ 0.214
6/117 x ϭ 0.813 m
6/118 ␮ ϭ 0.1948
6/119 T2 ϭ T1e␮␤/sin(␣/2), n ϭ 3.33
␳gr
᭤ 6/120 T ϭ
2␮e␮␲/2 ϩ 1 Ϫ ␮2
1 ϩ ␮2
6/121 (a) Tmax ϭ 76.0 lb, Tmin ϭ 24.0 lb

΄

(b) F ϭ 10 lb

6/122
6/123
6/124
6/125
6/126
6/127
6/128
6/129
6/130
6/131
6/132
6/133
6/134
6/135
6/136
6/137
6/138
6/139

΅

P ϭ 93.7 lb
Rotates ﬁrst at P ϭ 0.232mg
R ϭ 1855 N
C ϭ 273 lb, F ϭ 68.2 lb, PЈ ϭ 2.73 lb
A and B slip, C does not slip
T ϭ 7980 N
M ϭ 3.00 kN ⅐ m, ␮min ϭ 0.787
P ϭ 913 lb
(a) F ϭ 133.3 N, (b) F ϭ 127.6 N
(a) M ϭ 24.1 N ⅐ m, (b) M ϭ 13.22 N ⅐ m
␮s ϭ 0.767
(a) 0.304 Յ m Յ 13.17 kg
(b) 0.1183 Յ m Յ 33.8 kg
M ϭ 4.12 lb-in., MЈ ϭ 1.912 lb-in.
␮ ϭ 0.368
12.44 Յ m Յ 78.0 kg
␮ 2d
bϭaϩ k
2
W ϭ 70.1 lb
M ϭ 10.16 N ⅐ m

519

520

Problem Answers

6/140 P ϭ 25.3 N
2r ϩ (1 Ϫ ␮2)R
᭤ 6/141 dmin ϭ
1 ϩ ␮2
dmax ϭ R ϩ 2r
᭤ 6/142 (a) M ϭ 35.7 N ⅐ m, (b) MЈ ϭ 12.15 N ⅐ m
*6/143 Pmin ϭ 517 N at x ϭ 7.5 m
*6/144 ␪ ϭ 21.5Њ
*6/145 ␪max ϭ 59.9Њ, Pmax ϭ 0.295mg
T
T
*6/146 y ϭ 0: mg ϭ 21.2; y large: mg l 81.3

*6/147 ␮k ϭ 0.298, T ϭ 30.7 kN, h ϭ 58.1 m
*6/148 Pmax ϭ 2430 N, ␪ ϭ 26.6Њ
sin ␪
* 6/149 ␮s ϭ
1 ϩ tan ␪(tan ␪ Ϫ sin ␪)

(a) 24.0Њ Ͻ ␪ Ͻ 57.2Њ
(b) ␪ ϭ 41.8Њ, ␮s ϭ 0.554

* 6/150 V ϭ 0.867mg
* 6/151 ␮ ϭ 0.420

Chapter 7

΂ ΃

7/3

4P
␪ ϭ 2 tanϪ1 mg
␪
M ϭ mgl sin
2
b
RϭPr

7/4

P ϭ 2␳gb

7/1
7/2

΂ ΃
΂ ΃

7/14

M
␪ ϭ cos
mgb
2mg
␪ ϭ tanϪ1
3P
M ϭ mg(b cos ␪ Ϫ a sin ␪)
b
QϭP
a
P ϭ 4kl (tan ␪ Ϫ sin ␪)
R ϭ 11.67P
3
P ϭ mg
2
F ϭ 0.8R cos ␪
␪
3
M ϭ mgl sin
2
2
r
M ϭ (C Ϫ mg) n

7/15

e ϭ 0.983

7/5
7/6
7/7
7/8
7/9
7/10
7/11
7/12
7/13

7/16
7/17
7/18
7/19
7/20
7/21

Ϫ1

Ί΂ ΃ Ϫ 1
mg
␪ ϭ tan ΂ ΃, no
P
2b
h

CϭP

2

7/22

2

7/25

Pe(d ϩ c)
2bc
2mg
pϭ
A
P ϭ 309 lb

7/26

P ϭ W, no, Q ϭ

7/27

Pϭ

7/28

C ϭ 2mg

7/29

Fϭ

7/23
7/24

Cϭ

΃

2Feb
c(b Ϫ a)
b
b
Ί1 ϩ ΂L΃ Ϫ 2 L cos ␪ cot ␪
2

2␲M

Ίtan ␪ ϩ b

a

7/30

N ϭ 1.6P

7/31

␪1 ϭ cosϪ1

7/32
7/33
᭤ 7/34

΂

W
2e
1ϩ
2
2
Ίl Ϫ h2

L

2M
΂3mgl΃, ␪

2

ϭ cosϪ1

M ϭ 7.88 N ⅐ m
P ϭ 3.5 kN
Q ϭ 13.18 kN

2M
΂mgl΃

7/38

1
1
x ϭ 0: unstable; x ϭ : stable; x ϭ Ϫ : stable
2
2
mg
mg
␪ ϭ cosϪ1
, kmin ϭ
2kb
bΊ3
mg
kmin ϭ
4L
2R
l Ͻ mg

7/39

(a) unstable, (b) stable

7/40

xϭ

7/35
7/36

Ϫ1

mgl
sin 2␪
Fϭ
4h
e ϭ 0.597
R
F ϭ mg r sin ␪
cos ␪
P ϭ mg
␪
cos 2

h
Ί1 Ϫ ΂2b΃

M ϭ 2mgb

7/37

΂ ΃

Ί΂F΃ Ϫ h ΂k Ͻ F΃
h
k
2

2

Problem Answers

7/41

␪ ϭ sinϪ1

7/42

M
΂kb ΃

᭤ 7/58

MϾ

7/43
7/44

7/45

2

m
2
Stable
␪ ϭ 0 and 180Њ: unstable
␪ ϭ 120Њ and 240Њ: stable
mg
Pϩ
2
␪ ϭ 2 sinϪ1
2kb

΄

᭤ 7/59
᭤ 7/60

7/61
7/62
7/63
7/64
7/65
7/66
7/67
7/68
7/69
7/70

΅

7/49

1
mgl
2
2
4kb
sin ␪ (1 Ϫ cos ␪)
Pϭ
a
mg
kϭ
2b
2kb2
h Ͻ mg

7/50

␪ ϭ sinϪ1

7/51

kϽ

7/46
7/47
7/48

7/52
7/53
7/54

7/55
7/56
7/57

Kmin ϭ

7/71
᭤ 7/72

M
, M Ͻ kb2
kb2

᭤ 7/73

L
2l
mgb
kϭ 2
a
mgr2
hϭ
K

*7/74
*7/75
*7/76
*7/77
*7/78
*7/79

2mg
for stability
L
2mg
: unstable
cos ␪ ϭ
kL
kmax ϭ 1.125 lb /in.
␳ Ͻ 6r
h Ͻ bΊ2
␪ ϭ 0: k Ͼ

*7/80

521

(2m1 ϩ m2)pg

cot ␪
4␲
mg(r ϩ a)
kϭ
8a2
h ϭ 265 mm
P ϭ 1047 N
␪ ϭ 28.1Њ
hmax ϭ 0.363r
h Ͻ 2r
F ϭ 960,000 lb
A: a, b, d; B: c, e, f
hϽr
␮s ϭ 0.1443
␪ ϭ Ϫ6.82Њ: stable; ␪ ϭ 207Њ: unstable
x ϭ 2.05 m: stable
2R
bmin ϭ
3
mg
b2
1ϩ 2
kmin ϭ
2b
l
mg
␪ ϭ 0: stable if k Ͻ
a
mg
mg
1
1ϩ
: stable if k Ͼ
␪ ϭ cosϪ1
a
2
ka
x ϭ 130.3 mm
␪ ϭ 23.0Њ
V ϭ 56.3x2 Ϫ 231x
␪ ϭ 78.0Њ: stable; ␪ ϭ 260Њ: unstable
␪ ϭ 24.8Њ: unstable
␪ ϭ 71.7Њ
Mϭ

΂

΃

΄΂

R
ϭ 0.943
P

΃΅

΂␲ Ϫ ␪΃
4

sin

sin ␪

Appendix A
A/1
A/2
A/3
A/4
A/5
A/6

A ഡ 1600 mm2
bh3
hb3
bh 2 b2
,I ϭ
I ϭ
h ϩ
Ix ϭ
3 y
9 z
3
3
hb3
Iy ϭ
4
Iy ϭ 21.5 in.4
A ϭ 4800 mm2
bh3
hb3
Ix ϭ
, Iy ϭ
4
48
bh 2 b2
Iz ϭ
h ϩ
4
12

΂

΂

A/7
A/8

΃

΂

3␲ 4
3
Ϫ
IA ϭ ␲r4, IB ϭ r4
4
4
3
6) mm4
Ix ϭ 4.38(10

΃

΃

A/9

kB ϭ a /Ί3, kO ϭ a

΂

΃

1
4
A/10 Ix ϭ Iy ϭ ␲r3t, IC ϭ ␲r3t 1 Ϫ 2
2
␲
1
2
A/11 Ix ϭ Iy ϭ Ab2, IO ϭ Ab2
3
3
A/12 Ix ϭ 0.1963a4, Iy ϭ 1.648a4, kO ϭ 1.533a
A/13 kA ϭ 14.43 mm
A/14 Ix ϭ h3

b
h
΂a ϩ 12΃, I ϭ 12(a
4
y

3

ϩ a2b ϩ ab2 ϩ b3)

h 2
[h (3a ϩ b) ϩ a3 ϩ a2b ϩ ab2 ϩ b3]
12
4ab3
A/15 Ix ϭ
9␲
IO ϭ

522

Problem Answers
A/51 Ix ϭ 254 in.4, Ixexact ϭ 245 in.4
A/52 kO ϭ 0.778a
A/53 kC ϭ 261 mm
b2
b1
A/54 Ix ϭ h3
ϩ
4
12
h
Iy ϭ (b13 ϩ b12b2 ϩ b1b22 ϩ b23)
48
A/55 h ϭ 1.900 in.
A/56 Ix ϭ 0.222h4, Iy ϭ 0.0281h4, IO ϭ 0.251h4
A/57 Ix ϭ 0.319a4
A/58 Ix0 ϭ 6.24(106) mm4
A/59 IO ϭ 86.5(106) mm4
᭤ A/60 b ϭ 161.1 mm
A/61 (a) and (c): Ixy ϭ 360(104) mm4

A/16 kx ϭ 0.754, ky ϭ 1.673, kz ϭ 1.835
a4
A/17 IxЈ ϭ Ix ϭ
24
b2
b1
A/18 Ix ϭ h3
ϩ
4
12
h
Iy ϭ (b13 ϩ b12 b2 ϩ b1b22 ϩ b23)
48
␲a3b
1
A/19 Iy ϭ
, kO ϭ Ίa2 ϩ b2
4
2
a
A/20 kM ϭ
Ί6

΂

΃

΂

a4
a4
,I ϭ
28 y 20
n ϭ Ϫ0.518%
IxЈ ϭ 0.315a4
Iy ϭ 73.1(108) mm4, IyЈ ϭ 39.0(108) mm4
Ix ϭ 51.2 in.4
16ab3
Ix ϭ
105
5 4
Ix ϭ ␲r , kO ϭ 1.830r
8
Ix ϭ 140.8 in.4
ky ϭ 53.1 mm

A/21 Ix ϭ
A/22
A/23
A/24
A/25
A/26
A/27
A/28
A/29

΂

΃

΂

(b) and (d): Ixy ϭ Ϫ360(104) mm4
A/62 Ix ϭ 2.44(108) mm4, Iy ϭ 9.80(108) mm4
Ixy ϭ Ϫ14.14(106) mm4
A/63 Ixy ϭ 110.2 in.4
A/64

Ί5
Ί10
a, kz ϭ
a
4
4
Ix ϭ 0.1988r4
Ix ϭ 0.0833bh3, Ix ϭ 0.0781bh3
Iy ϭ 0.785R4, Iy ϭ 0.702R4
n ϭ 3.68%
nA ϭ 50%, nIy ϭ 22.2%

A/33 kx ϭ ky ϭ
᭤ A/34

A/35
A/36
A/37
A/38

Ί5
Ί10
a, kz ϭ
a
4
4
Ix ϭ 649 in.4
Ix ϭ 130.8(106) mm4
Ix ϭ 4.94a4, Iy ϭ 3.37a4
Ix ϭ 0.01825a4, Iy ϭ 0.1370a4

A/39 kx ϭ ky ϭ
A/40
A/41
A/42
A/43

A/44 Ix ϭ 22.6(106) mm4, Iy ϭ 9.81(106) mm4
58
A/45 Ix ϭ a4
3
A/46 n ϭ 0.1953 ϩ 2.34y2, n ϭ 9.57%
A/47 kA ϭ 78.9 mm
A/48 kO ϭ 7.92 in.

΂

΃

A/49 Ix ϭ

hb 7 2 2 2
h ϩ b ϩ hb , n ϭ 176.0%
9 4
9

A/50 Ix ϭ

5Ί3 4
a
16

(a) and (c): Ixy ϭ 9.60(106) mm4
(b): Ixy ϭ Ϫ4.71(106) mm4

΃

a4
1
a4
1
␣ ϩ sin 2␣ , Iy ϭ
␣ Ϫ sin 2␣
4
2
4
2
A/31 IxЈ ϭ IyЈ ϭ Ix ϭ Iy
A/32 Ix ϭ 25.6 in.4, Iy ϭ 30.5 in.4, IO ϭ 56.1 in.4
A/30 Ix ϭ

΃

(d): Ixy ϭ Ϫ2.98(106) mm4
1
A/65 Ixy ϭ bL3 sin 2␣
6
bL3
A/66 Ixy1 ϭ Ixy3 ϭ
sin 2␣
6
ϪbL3
Ixy2 ϭ Ixy4 ϭ
sin 2␣
6
A/67 Ixy ϭ 18.40(106) mm4

΂

΃

1 2 3
1
A/68 Ixy ϭ r3b, Ix0y0 ϭ
Ϫ
rb
2
2 ␲
b2h2
b2h2
A/69 Ixy ϭ
,I
ϭϪ
24 x0y0
72
b2h2
A/70 Ixy ϭ
8
A/71 Ixy ϭ Ϫ0.01647r4
A/72 Ixy ϭ Ϫ1968 in.4
2
A/73 Ixy ϭ r4
3
A/74 A ϭ 1.316(104) mm2
h2
A/75 Ixy ϭ (3a2 ϩ 2ab ϩ b2)
24
1
A/76 Ixy ϭ a2b2
8
r4
A/77 Ixy ϭ (1Ϫ cos 2␪)
16
5 4
A/78 Ixy ϭ
s
16
1
A/79 Ixy ϭ a2b2
16

Problem Answers
A/80 IxЈ ϭ 0.0277b4, IyЈ ϭ 0.1527b4
IxЈyЈ ϭ 0.0361b4
A/81 Imax ϭ 3.79a4, Imin ϭ 0.373a4, ␣ ϭ 111.5Њ
r4
r4
r4
A/82 IxЈ ϭ (␲ Ϫ Ί3), IyЈ ϭ (␲ ϩ Ί3), IxЈyЈ ϭ
16
16
16
A/83 Ix ϭ 0.446b4, Iy ϭ 0.280b4
A/85 Imin ϭ 0.505a4, Imax ϭ 6.16a4, ␣ ϭ 112.5Њ
A/86 Imin ϭ 0.252b4, Imax ϭ 3.08b4, ␣ ϭ Ϫ22.5Њ
A/87 Imax ϭ 183.6 in.4, ␣ ϭ Ϫ16.85Њ
*A/88 (IxЈ)min ϭ 2.09(108) mm4 at ␪ ϭ 22.5Њ
*A/89 Imin ϭ 3.03(106) mm4 at ␪ ϭ 64.1Њ
*A/90 (IxЈ)min ϭ 0.0432a4 at ␪ ϭ 21.8Њ
(IxЈ)max ϭ 1.070a4 at ␪ ϭ 111.8Њ

(IyЈ)min ϭ 0.0432a4 at ␪ ϭ 111.8Њ
(IyЈ)max ϭ 1.070a4 at ␪ ϭ 21.8Њ
(IxЈyЈ)min ϭ Ϫ0.514a4 at ␪ ϭ 66.8Њ
(IxЈyЈ)max ϭ 0.514a4 at ␪ ϭ 156.8Њ
* A/91 IxЈyЈ ϭ Ϫ203 sin 2␪ Ϫ 192 cos 2␪, ␪ ϭ 68.3Њ
* A/92 Imax ϭ 1.820(106) mm4, ␣ ϭ 30.1Њ
* A/93 Imin ϭ 0.0547b4 at ␪ ϭ 41.1Њ
Imax ϭ 0.286b4 at ␪ ϭ 131.1Њ
* A/94 Imin ϭ 20.8(106) mm4 at ␪ ϭ 9.26Њ
Imax ϭ 147.2(106) mm4 at ␪ ϭ 99.3Њ

523

This page intentionally left blank

Conversion Charts Between SI and U.S. Customary Units

Conversion Charts Between SI and U.S. Customary Units (cont.)


